Adjusted geomagnetic data are magnetometer measurements with provisional correction factors applied such that vector quantities are oriented in a local Cartesian frame in which the X axis points north, the Y axis points east, and the Z axis points down. These correction factors are determined from so-called absolute measurements, which are “ground truth” observations made in the field using specialized magnetometers and survey equipment that are (nearly) colocated with the automated and continuously running magnetic measurement instrumentation. Correction factors can be substantial, up to hundreds of nanoTeslas, depending on the geologic and geomagnetic characteristics of the observatory site. They also tend to evolve over time because of instrument response instability and changing site characteristics. Historically, correction factors were determined offline, up to 1 year or more post-measurement, and applied to raw measurements to produce “Definitive” data for scientific analysis. Growing demand for corrected real-time geomagnetic data to better support space weather operations motivated development of an “Adjusted” geomagnetic data product. Modern computational tools, and some notable practical concerns, dictated a transition to affine transformations in lieu of more traditional baseline corrections, as well as a calibration parameter estimation algorithm that is more robust and statistically optimal, and therefore better suited for automated and unsupervised execution. A theoretical basis for this algorithm is presented, along with a demonstration and validation based on a comparison of results obtained with traditional techniques. Discrepancies between Definitive corrected data and near real-time Adjusted data obtained using affine transformations are minimal, generally much less than 5 nanoTeslas per vector component, and less than 1 nanoTesla for the total field magnitude, which satisfies International Real-Time Magnetic Observatory Network (INTERMAGNET) standards.,
 Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCR) are the slowly varying, highly energetic background source of energetic particles that constantly bombard Earth. GCR originate outside the solar system and are likely formed by explosive events such as supernova. These highly energetic particles consist of essentially every element ranging from hydrogen, accounting for approximately 89% of the GCR spectrum, to uranium, which is found in trace amounts only. These nuclei are fully ionized, meaning all electrons have been stripped from these atoms. Because of this, these particles interact with and are influenced by magnetic fields. The strong magnetic fields of the Sun modulate the GCR flux and spectrum at Earth.,
 Over the course of a solar cycle the solar wind modulates the fraction of the lower-energy GCR particles such that a majority cannot penetrate to Earth near solar maximum. Near solar minimum, in the absence of many coronal mass ejections and their corresponding magnetic fields, GCR particles have easier access to Earth. Just as the solar cycle follows a roughly 11-year cycle, so does the GCR, with its maximum, however, coming near solar minimum. But unlike the solar cycle, where bursts of activity can change the environment quickly, the GCR spectrum remains relatively constant in energy and composition, varying only slowly with time. (See Forbush decrease for short-term changes of GCR related to space strong solar events),
 These charged particles are traveling at large fractions of the speed of light and have tremendous energy. When these particles hit the atmosphere, large showers of secondary particles are created with some even reaching the ground. These particles pose little threat to humans and systems on the ground, but they can be measured with sensitive instruments. The Earth’s own magnetic field also works to protect Earth from these particles largely deflecting them away from the equatorial regions but providing little-to-no protection near the polar regions or above roughly 55 degrees magnetic latitude (magnetic latitude and geographic latitude differ due to the tilt and offset of the Earth’s magnetic field from its geographic center). This constant shower of GCR particles at high latitudes can result in increased radiation exposures for aircrew and passengers at high latitudes and altitudes. Additionally, these particles can easily pass through or stop in satellite systems, sometimes depositing enough energy to result in errors or damage in spacecraft electronics and systems.,
 The Ionosphere is part of Earth’s upper atmosphere, between 80 and about 600 km  where Extreme UltraViolet (EUV) and x-ray  solar radiation ionizes the atoms and molecules thus creating a layer of electrons.  the ionosphere is important because it reflects and modifies radio waves used for communication and navigation. Other phenomena such as energetic charged particles and cosmic rays  also have an ionizing effect and can contribute to the ionosphere.,
 The atmospheric atoms and molecules are impacted by the high energy the EUV and  X-ray photons from the sun.  The amount of energy (photon flux) at EUV and x-ray wavelengths varies by nearly a factor of ten over the 11 year solar cycle.  The density of the ionosphere changes accordingly.  Due to spectral variability of the solar radiation and the density of various constituents in the atmosphere, there are layers are created within the ionosphere, called the D, E, and F-layers. Other solar phenomena, such as flares, and changes in the solar wind and geomagnetic storms also effect the charging of the ionosphere.  Since the largest amount of ionization is caused by solar irradiance, the night-side of the earth, and the pole pointed away from the sun (depending on the season) have much less ionization than the day-side of the earth, and the pole pointing towards the sun.,
 The Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights) and Aurora Australis (Southern Lights) are the result of electrons colliding with the upper reaches of Earth’s atmosphere. (Protons cause faint and diffuse aurora, usually not easily visible to the human eye.) The electrons are energized through acceleration processes in the downwind tail (night side) of the magnetosphere and at lower altitudes along auroral field lines. The accelerated electrons follow the magnetic field of Earth down to the Polar Regions where they collide with oxygen and nitrogen atoms and molecules in Earth’s upper atmosphere. In these collisions, the electrons transfer their energy to the atmosphere thus exciting the atoms and molecules to higher energy states. When they relax back down to lower energy states, they release their energy in the form of light. This is similar to how a neon light works. The aurora typically forms 80 to 500 km above Earth’s surface.,
 Earth’s magnetic field guides the electrons such that the aurora forms two ovals approximately centered at the magnetic poles. During major geomagnetic storms these ovals expand away from the poles such that aurora can be seen over most of the United States. Aurora comes in several different shapes. Often the auroral forms are made of many tall rays that look much like a curtain made of folds of cloth. During the evening, these rays can form arcs that stretch from horizon to horizon. Late in the evening, near midnight, the arcs often begin to twist and sway, just as if a wind were blowing on the curtains of light. At some point, the arcs may expand to fill the whole sky, moving rapidly and becoming very bright. This is the peak of what is called an auroral substorm.,
 Then in the early morning the auroral forms can take on a more cloud-like appearance. These diffuse patches often blink on and off repeatedly for hours, then they disappear as the sun rises in the east. The best place to observe the aurora is under an oval shaped region between the north and south latitudes of about 60 and 75 degrees. At these polar latitudes, the aurora can be observed more than half of the nights of a given year.,
 When space weather activity increases and more frequent and larger storms and substorms occur, the aurora extends equatorward. During large events, the aurora can be observed as far south as the US, Europe, and Asia. During very large events, the aurora can be observed even farther from the poles. (Tips on viewing the aurora and maps of the typical extent of the aurora). Of course, to observe the aurora, the skies must be clear and free of clouds. It must also be dark so during the summer months at auroral latitudes, the midnight sun prevents auroral observations. Photo by Neal Brown (Fairbanks),
 A new report and map published by the U.S. Geological Survey provides critical insight to electric power grid operators across the northeastern United States in the event of a once-per-century magnetic superstorm.  ,
 Major metropolitan areas along the I-95 corridor – including Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington, DC – will benefit from the report’s geoelectrical hazard assessment, published in the journal Space Weather. ,
 “These new maps will allow states and utilities to better anticipate the threat and response to future magnetic storms across the northeast,” said Jim Reilly, director of the USGS. “They will prove useful for planning for future power-grid installations and will help utility companies develop strategies to mitigate blackouts and power system damage.”,
 Geomagnetic storms occasionally occur in the space environment surrounding the Earth due to the dynamic influence of the sun and the solar wind on the Earth’s geomagnetic field. On the Earth’s surface, magnetic storms can produce blackouts – for example, a storm in March 1989 caused a blackout of Quebec, Canada, and the northeastern United States. Even more concerning are the rare magnetic superstorms comparable to the “Carrington” storm of 1859, which today could cause blackouts on a continental scale and damage infrastructure that would not only be costly and time consuming to repair, but could potentially pose a threat to human safety.,
 The new USGS research shows that geological structure impacts the strength and direction of storm-generated geoelectric fields. In particular, USGS models show high geoelectric risk potential across the igneous and metamorphic rock of the Appalachian Mountains. In contrast, the sedimentary rock of Appalachian Plateau and Mid-Atlantic Coastal Plain exhibits lower potential.,
 A “severe” storm occurred on June 21-23, 2015. This storm arose in response to variable solar-wind conditions that the Space Weather Prediction Center of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (SWPC, NOAA) associated with active region 2371 on the Sun. A series of 3 coronal mass ejections (CMEs) originated from this active region. These were subsequently recorded by NASA’s Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE) satellite, located on the Sun-Earth line at a distance approximately 1% of the distance from the Earth to the Sun, as abrupt enhancements in solar-wind velocity and density. With the arrival of the CMEs at the Earth on about June 21 16:45 UT, June 22 05:45 UT, and June 22 18:30 UT, concomitant increases in solar-wind ram pressure abruptly compressed the Earth’s magnetosphere. These generated eastward-flowing magnetopause electric currents and positive perturbations in the horizontal component of the geomagnetic field recorded at low-latitude magnetic observatories around the world, including at USGS observatories in Guam, Honolulu, and San Juan.,
 After the arrival at Earth of the third CME, ACE data indicate that the solar wind’s interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) was southward directed, an orientation that is optimal for connection of the IMF onto geomagnetic field lines. Once this connection occurred, the magnetosphere was effectively opened up to the solar wind, allowing electrically charged, energetic particles to be deposited into the magnetotail and into the westward-flowing equatorial ring current of the inner magnetosphere. This process is recorded at low-latitude magnetic observatories as a general “main-phase” diminishment in horizontal geomagnetic disturbance, the longitudinal average of which is the Dst index. This storm saw a maximum –Dst of 195 nT, realized on June 23 at about 04:30 UT and, so, by this measure this storm was slightly smaller than the St. Patrick’s day storm of March 17, 2015. Still, this storm is the second largest of this unusually subdued solar cycle. By comparison, in the last solar cycle, several storms had maximum –Dst exceeding 300 nT, and one exceeded 400 nT. The mid-latitude magnetic activity index Kp reached a value of 8 (one less than the maximum of 9).,
 As was typical for an intense storm, geomagnetic activity was particularly intense at high latitudes. For example, at the Barrow observatory on the north shore of Alaska, magnetic declination varied by about 10 degrees over the course of this storm. Aurora were seen across Alaska, Canada, and many states in the lower continental United States.,
 The storm attracted media attention, including reports published by the Washington Post, CBS News, NBC News, National Geographic, and Slate. A summary of this storm was also featured on the home page of the USGS.,
 Space weather impacts radio communication in a number of ways. At frequencies in the 1 to 30 mega Hertz range (known as “High Frequency” or HF radio), the changes in ionospheric density and structure modify the transmission path and even block transmission of HF radio signals completely. These frequencies are used by amateur (ham) radio operators and many industries such as commercial airlines. They are also used by a number of government agencies such as the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Department of Defense.,
 There are several types of space weather that can impact HF radio communication. In a typical sequence of space weather storms, the first impacts are felt during the solar flare itself. The solar x-rays from the sun penetrate to the bottom of the ionosphere (to around 80 km). There the x-ray photons ionize the atmosphere and create an enhancement of the D layer of the ionosphere. This enhanced D-layer acts both as a reflector of radio waves at some frequencies and an absorber of waves at other frequencies. The Radio Blackout associated with solar flares occurs on the dayside region of Earth and is most intense when the sun is directly overhead.,
 Another type of space weather, the Radiation Storm caused by energetic solar protons, can also disrupt HF radio communication. The protons are guided by Earth’s magnetic field such that they collide with the upper atmosphere near the north and south poles. The fast-moving protons have an affect similar to the x-ray photons and create an enhanced D-Layer thus blocking HF radio communication at high latitudes. During auroral displays, the precipitating electrons can enhance other layers of the ionosphere and have similar disrupting and blocking effects on radio communication. This occurs mostly on the night side of the polar regions of Earth where the aurora is most intense and most frequent.,
 The use of single and dual frequency satellite radio navigation systems, like the Global Positioning System (GPS), has grown dramatically in the last decade. GPS receivers are now in nearly every cell phone and in many automobiles, trucks, and any equipment that moves and needs precision location measurements. High precision dual frequency GPS systems are used for farming, construction, exploration, surveying, snow removal and many other applications critical to a functional society. Other satellite navigation systems in orbit include the European Galileo system and the Russian GLONASS system.,
 There are several ways in which space weather impacts GPS function. GPS radio signals travel from the satellite to the receiver on the ground, passing through the Earth’s ionosphere. The charged plasma of the ionosphere bends the path of the GPS radio signal similar to the way a lens bends the path of light. In the absence of space weather, GPS systems compensate for the “average” or “quiet”  ionosphere, using a model to calculate its effect on the accuracy of the positioning information. But when the ionosphere is disturbed by a space weather event, the models are no longer accurate and the receivers are unable to calculate an accurate position based on the satellites overhead.,
 In calm conditions, single frequency GPS systems can provide position information with an accuracy of a meter or less. During a severe space weather storm, these errors can increase to tens of meters or more. Dual frequency GPS systems can provide position information accurate to a few centimeters. In this case the two different GPS signals are used to better characterize the ionosphere and remove its impact on the position calculation. But when the ionosphere becomes highly disturbed, the GPS receiver cannot lock on the satellite signal and position information becomes inaccurate.,
 Geomagnetic storms create large disturbances in the ionosphere. The currents and energy introduced by a geomagnetic storm enhance the ionosphere and increase the total height-integrated number of ionospheric electrons, or the Total Electron Count (TEC). GPS systems cannot correctly model this dynamic enhancement and errors are introduced into the position calculations. This usually occurs at high latitudes, though major storms can produce large TEC enhancements at mid-latitudes as well.,
 Near the Earth’s magnetic equator there are current systems and electric fields that create instabilities in the ionosphere. The instabilities are most severe just after sunset. These smaller scale (tens of kilometers) instabilities, or bubbles, cause GPS signals to “scintillate”, much like waves on the surface of a body of water will disrupt and scatter the path of light as it passes through them. Near the equator, dual frequency GPS systems often lose their lock due to “ionospheric scintillation”. Ionospheric scintillations are not associated with any sort of space weather storm, but are simply part of the natural day-night cycle of the equatorial ionosphere.,
 Drag is a force exerted on an object moving through a fluid, and it is oriented in the direction of relative fluid flow. Drag acts opposite to the direction of motion and tends to slow an object. As an example, think of running against a high wind and feeling the drag pushing you back in the direction of relative fluid flow. This same force acts on spacecraft and objects flying in the space environment. Drag has a significant impact on spacecraft in low Earth orbit (LEO), generally defined as an orbit below an altitude of approximately 2,000 kilometers (1,200 mi). Although the air density is much lower than near the Earth’s surface, the air resistance in those layers of the atmosphere where satellites in LEO travel is still strong enough to produce drag and pull them closer to the Earth (Figure 1, shown above, the region of the Earth’s atmosphere where atmospheric drag is an important factor perturbing spacecraft orbits.(NASA/GSFC)). The International Space Station (ISS) and the Hubble Space Telescope are examples of spacecraft operating in LEO.,
 The drag force on satellites increases during times when the Sun is active. When the Sun adds extra energy the atmosphere the low density layers of air at LEO altitudes rise and are replaced by higher density layers that were previously at lower altitudes. As a result, the spacecraft now flies through the higher density layer and experiences a stronger drag force. When the Sun is quiet, satellites in LEO have to boost their orbits about four times per year to make up for atmospheric drag. When solar activity is at its greatest over the 11-year solar cycle, satellites may have to be maneuvered every 2-3 weeks to maintain their orbit [1].,
 In addition to these long-term changes in upper atmospheric temperature and density caused by the solar cycle, interactions between the solar wind and the Earth’s magnetic field during geomagnetic storms can produce large short-term increases in upper atmosphere temperature and density, increasing drag on satellites and changing their orbits. The North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) has to re-identify hundreds of objects and record their new orbits after a large solar storm event (Figure 2). During the March 1989 storm event, for example, the NASA's Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) spacecraft was reported to have \dropped as if it hit a brick wall\ due to the increased atmospheric drag.,
 It is extremely important to keep track of spacecraft and objects flying in the space to avoid collisions with space junk and orbital debris that may be in their path. Collision avoidance has become of increasing concern due to the recent accidental hypervelocity collision of two intact spacecraft in February, 2009. The collision occurred at an altitude of 790 km, leaving pieces of debris that have been gradually separated into different orbital planes around the Earth, threatening other satellites for the next few decades. Since 1957, more than 25,000 artificial space debris have been cataloged (Figure 3), many of which have naturally decayed into the lower atmosphere. Currently, the U.S. Space Surveillance Network (SSN) tracks over 20,000 man-made objects larger than 10 cm in size, which are known as the “catalogued” population. Debris between 1 cm and 10 cm (approximately 500,000), referred to as the “lethal” population, are the most concerning as they cannot be tracked or cataloged and can cause catastrophic damage when colliding with a satellite. Objects smaller than 1 cm (approximately 135 million measuring from 1mm to 1cm, and many more smaller than 1 mm) that could disable a satellite upon impact are termed the “risk” population [3].,
 Figure 3. Thousands of manmade objects—95 % of them “space junk”— occupy low Earth orbit. Each black dot in this image shows either a functioning satellite, an inactive satellite, or a piece of debris. Although the space near Earth looks crowded, each dot is much larger than the satellite or debris it represents, and collisions are extremely rare. (NASA illustration courtesy Orbital Debris Program Office.),
 The consequences of a spacecraft collision with debris can range from performance degradation to failure and satellite fragmentation. In LEO, debris as small as a few millimeters in diameter can puncture unprotected fuel lines and damage sensitive components, while debris smaller than 1 mm in diameter can erode thermal surfaces and damage optics. Although smaller objects can partly be mitigated through the use of meteor bumpers, such as on the ISS, the only way to mitigate larger objects impact is to maneuver the spacecraft to avoid collision. Such maneuvers are expensive, impact the operation of sensitive experiments on board, and ideally should only be done if the chance of collision is high. To assess the risk, and mitigate the likelihood of collision, the SSN monitors these objects and predicts their orbits about three days ahead.,
 Orbit propagation models are used to determine the location of space objects in the relatively near-term (typically over a period of a few days or less) for purposes of collision avoidance or re-entry predictions, and also to make long-term predictions (typically over a period of years) about the debris environment. Both short- and long-term propagation models must take into account the various forces acting on space objects in Earth’s orbit including atmospheric drag. Since accurate orbit propagation models that include all forces acting on an orbiting object can be very computation intensive, most models take into account only the forces that most strongly affect the space objects in particular orbital regions. The primary forces acting on a space object in LEO are atmospheric drag and gravitational attraction of the Earth [4].,
 The largest uncertainty in determining orbits for satellites operating in low Earth orbit is the atmospheric drag. Drag is the most difficult force to model mainly because of the complexity of neutral atmosphere variations driven by the Sun, and the propagation from below of lower atmosphere waves [5, 6]. Atmospheric neutral density models routinely used in orbit determination applications are mainly empirical. These models are based on historical observations to which parametric equations have been fitted, representing the known variations of the upper atmosphere with local time, latitude, season, solar and geomagnetic activity [7, 8, 9]. First-principle (or physics-based) models can also provide information about the atmospheric density conditions. Unlike empirical models, first principles physics models seek to calculate a physical quantity starting directly from established laws of physics without making assumptions such as empirical or fitted parameters. Taking into account the interactions between upper atmosphere winds, composition and densities, first-principle models are able to provide a realistic representation of neutral density in the upper atmosphere if the magnitude, spatial distribution, and temporal evolution of the solar sources can be defined with sufficient accuracy, especially in long-duration magnetic storm events [10].,
 Going to the CTIPe web page shows a simulation using the coupled thermosphere-ionosphere-plasmasphere electrodynamics (CTIPe; https://www.swpc.noaa.gov/products/ctipe-total-electron-content-forecast) physics-based model [11], illustrates the increase in atmospheric density at 400km altitude during the occurrence of a large magnetic storm on May 15, 2005, as a satellite (represented by the black diamond) flies through. The atmospheric density is given in Kg/m3. As the time progresses, the satellite will encounter denser air following the beginning of the magnetic storm (starting around 06:00 Universal Time). As the storm comes to end, atmospheric density slowly goes back to quiet conditions.,
 5. Marcos, F., B. R. Bowman, and R. E. Sheehan (2006), Accuracy of Earth’s thermospheric neutral density models, paper presented at AIAA 2006–6167, AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Am. Inst. of Aeronatu. and Astronaut., Keystone, Colo., 21–24 Aug.,
 6. Doornbos, E. (2007), Thermosphere density model calibration, in Space Weather: Research Towards Applications in Europe, Astrophys. Space Sci. Libr. Ser., vol. 344, edited by J. Lilensten, pp. 107–114, Springer, New York.,
 7. Bruinsma, S., G. Thullier, and F. Barlier (2003), The DTM-2000 empirical thermosphere model with new data assimilation and constraints at lower boundary: Accuracy and properties, J. Atmos. Sol. Terr. Phys., 65, 1053–1070, doi:10.1016/S1364-6826(03)00137-8.,
 8. Picone, J. M., A. E. Hedin, D. P. Drob, and A. C. Aikin (2002), NRLMSISE-00 empirical model of the atmosphere: Statistical comparisons and scientific issues, J. Geophys. Res., 107(A12), 1468, doi:10.1029/2002JA009430.,
 9. Bowman, B. R., W. K. Tobiska, F. A. Marcos, C. Y. Huang, C. S. Lin, and W. J. Burke (2008), A new empirical thermospheric density model JB2008 using new solar and geomagnetic indices, paper presented at the AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Am. Inst. of Aeron. and Astron., Honolulu, Hawaii, 18–21 Aug.,
 10. Fuller-Rowell, T. J., and S. C. Solomon (2010), Flares, coronal mass ejections, and atmospheric responses, in Space Storms and Radiation: Causes and Effects, edited by C. J. Schrijver and G. L. Siscoe, pp. 321–357, Cambridge Univ. Press, New York.,
 11. Codrescu, M. V., C. Negrea, and M. Fedrizzi, T. J. FullerRowell, A. Dobin, N. Jakowsky, H. Khalsa, T. Matsuo, and N. Maruyama (2012), A real-time run of the coupled thermosphere ionosphere plasmasphere electrodynamics (CTIPe) model, Space Weather, 10, S02001, doi:10.1029/2011SW000736.,
 Coronal holes appear as dark areas in the solar corona in extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and soft x-ray solar images. They appear dark because they are cooler, less dense regions than the surrounding plasma and are regions of open, unipolar magnetic fields. This open, magnetic field line structure allows the solar wind to escape more readily into space, resulting in streams of relatively fast solar wind and is often referred to as a high speed stream in the context of analysis of structures in interplanetary space.,
 Coronal holes can develop at any time and location on the Sun, but are more common and persistent during the years around solar minimum. The more persistent coronal holes can sometimes last through several solar rotations (27-day periods). Coronal holes are most prevalent and stable at the solar north and south poles; but these polar holes can grow and expand to lower solar latitudes. It is also possible for coronal holes to develop in isolation from the polar holes; or for an extension of a polar hole to split off and become an isolated structure. Persistent coronal holes are long-lasting sources for high speed solar wind streams. As the high speed stream interacts with the relatively slower ambient solar wind, a compression region forms, known as a co-rotating interaction region (CIR). From the perspective of a fixed observer in interplanetary space, the CIR will be seen to lead the coronal hole high speed stream (CH HSS).,
 The CIR can result in particle density enhancement and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) strength increases preceding onset of the CH HSS. As the CH HSS begins to arrive at Earth, solar wind speed and temperature increase, while particle density begins to decrease. After passage of the CIR and upon transition into the CH HSS flow, the overall IMF strength will normally begin to slowly weaken.,
 Generally, coronal holes located at or near the solar equator are most likely to result in any CIR passage and/or higher solar wind speeds at Earth. Strong CIRs and the faster CH HSS can impact Earth’s magnetosphere enough to cause periods of geomagnetic storming to the G1-G2 (Minor to Moderate) levels; although rarer cases of stronger storming may also occur. Geomagnetic storms are classified using a five-level NOAA Space Weather Scale. The larger and more expansive coronal holes can often be a source for high solar wind speeds that buffet Earth for many days.,
 Because of their potential for escalated geomagnetic activity and possible storming (G1 or higher), forecasters analyze coronal holes closely and also note them on the daily synoptic drawing. SWPC forecasters take into account any possible effects of CIR and CH HSS activity when forecasting the anticipated levels of overall planetary geomagnetic response for each 3-hour synoptic period over the next three days; as detailed in the 3-day forecast. Additionally, any predicted CIR or CH HSS influences are explained in more detail in the forecast discussion.,
 The magnetosphere is the region of space surrounding Earth where the dominant magnetic field is the magnetic field of Earth, rather than the magnetic field of interplanetary space. The magnetosphere is formed by the interaction of the solar wind with Earth’s magnetic field. This figure illustrates the shape and size of Earth’s magnetic field that is continually changing as it is buffeted by the solar wind. ,
 It has been several thousand years since the Chinese discovered that certain magnetic minerals, called lodestones, would align in roughly the north-south direction. The reason for this effect wasn’t understood, though, until 1600, when William Gilbert published De Magnete and demonstrated that our Earth behaved like a giant magnet and loadstones were aligning with Earth’s magnetic field. ,
 After several more centuries of investigation, it is now known that Earth’s magnetic field is quite complex, but still, to a great extent, can be viewed as a dipole, with north and south poles like a simple bar magnet. Earth’s magnetic axis, the dipole, is inclined at about 11 degrees to Earth’s spin axis. If space were a vacuum, Earth’s magnetic field would extend to infinity, getting weaker with distance, but in 1951, while studying why comet tails always point away from the sun, Ludwig Biermann discovered that the sun emits what we now call the solar wind. This continuous flow of plasma, comprised of mostly electrons and protons, with an embedded magnetic field, interacts with Earth and other objects in the solar system. ,
 The pressure of the solar wind on Earth’s magnetic field compresses the field on the dayside of Earth and stretches the field into a long tail on the nightside. The shape of the resulting distorted field has been compared to the appearance of water flowing around a rock in a stream. On the dayside of Earth, rather than extending to infinity, the magnetic field is confined to within about 10 Earth radii from the center of Earth and on the nightside, the field is stretched out to hundreds of Earth radii, well beyond the orbit of the moon at 60 Earth radii.,
 The boundary between the solar wind and Earth’s magnetic field is called the magnetopause. The boundary is constantly in motion as Earth is buffeted by the ever-changing solar wind. While the magnetopause shields us to some extent from the solar wind, it is far from impenetrable, and energy, mass, and momentum are transferred from the solar wind to regions inside Earth’s magnetosphere. The interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s magnetic field, and the influence of the underlying atmosphere and ionosphere, creates various regions of fields, plasmas, and currents inside the magnetosphere such as the plasmasphere, the ring current, and radiation belts. The consequence is that conditions inside the magnetosphere are highly dynamic and create what we call “space weather” that can affect technological systems and human activities. For example, the radiation belts can have impacts on the operations of satellites, and particles and currents from the magnetosphere can heat the upper atmosphere and result in satellite drag that can affect the orbits of low-altitude Earth orbiting satellites. Influences from the magnetosphere on the ionosphere can also affect communication and navigations systems. All of these effects are discussed elsewhere in more detail.,
 All weather on Earth, from the surface of the planet out into space, begins with the Sun.  Space weather and terrestrial weather (the weather we feel at the surface) are influenced by the small changes the Sun undergoes during its solar cycle.  ,
 The most important impact the Sun has on Earth is from the brightness or irradiance of the Sun itself. The Sun produces energy in the form of photons of light. The variability of the Sun's output is wavelength dependent; different wavelengths have higher variability than others. Most of the energy from the Sun is emitted in the visible wavelengths (approximately 400 – 800 nanometers (nm)).  The output from the sun in these wavelengths is nearly constant and changes by only one part in a thousand (0.1%) over the course of the 11-year solar cycle.,
 At Ultraviolet or UV wavelengths (120 – 400 nm), the solar irradiance variability is larger over the course of the solar cycle, with changes up to 15%. This has a significant impact on the absorption of energy by ozone and in the stratosphere. At shorter wavelengths, like the Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV), the Sun changes by 30% - 300% over very short timescales (i.e. minutes). These wavelengths are absorbed in the upper atmosphere so they have minimal impact on the climate of Earth. At the other end of the light spectrum, at Infrared (IR) wavelengths (800 – 10,000 nm), the Sun is very stable and only changes by a percent or less over the solar cycle.,
 The total wavelength-integrated energy from sunlight is referred to as the Total Solar Irradiance (TSI). It is measured from satellites to be about 1365.5 Watts/m2 at solar minimum to 1366.5 Watts/m2 at solar maximum. An increase of 0.1% in the TSI represents about 1.3 Watts/m2 change in energy input at the top of the atmosphere. This energy is scattered, reflected, and absorbed at various altitudes in the atmosphere, but the resulting change in the temperature of the atmosphere is measurable. It should be noted that the change in climate due to solar variability is likely small, but more research needs to be done.,
 There are other types of space weather that can impact the atmosphere. Energetic particles penetrate into the atmosphere and change the chemical constituents. These changes in minor species such as Nitrous Oxide (NO) can have long lasting consequences in the upper and middle atmosphere, however it has not been determined if these have a major impact on the global climate of Earth.,
 The duration of solar minimum may also have an impact on Earth's climate. During solar minimum there is a maximum in the amount of Cosmic rays, high energy particles whose source is outside our Solar system, reaching earth. There is a theory that cosmic rays can create nucleation sites in the atmosphere which seed cloud formation and create cloudier conditions. If this were true, then there would be a significant impact on climate, which would be modulated by the 11-year solar cycle.,
 The electric power grid, and consequently the power to your home and business, can be disrupted by space weather.  One of the great discoveries of the 19th century was the realization that a time-varying magnetic field is able to produce an electrical current in a conducting wire.  The basic idea is that the time rate of change of the magnetic flux (i.e. lines of magnetic force) passing through a current loop is proportional to the current that is generated around the loop. A slightly earlier but equally important discovery was that a current-carrying wire produces a magnetic field.  The application of these principles is widely prevalent in modern society in electrical power generators, electrical power transformers, and electrical motors, for example.,
 Time-varying magnetic fields and electrical current systems are not just artificial phenomena, but in fact are quite common in nature too.  Natural electrical current systems which vary in time can be found inside the Earth, in the oceans, and in the upper atmosphere of the earth (above ~100 km) where the constituents of the atmosphere include positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons which move about in a myriad of complicated ways.  Many of these upper atmospheric current systems are constantly present and modulate in a regular way in response to the rotation of the earth, the gravitational pull of the moon, and the slow variation of solar radiation over the course of the solar cycle.  At times, though, these current systems can be greatly enhanced and exhibit rapid changes with time and space, a phenomenon typically referred to as a geomagnetic storm.  Geomagnetic storms in turn are caused by disturbances that propagate away from the Sun, travel through interplanetary space and interact with Earth’s space environment.,
 We might expect that the early inventors of the telegraph systems did not realize that the electrical circuit they were constructing was threaded by lines of naturally produced magnetic flux, and, even more surprising, that this flux could vary with time and induce a natural current in their system.  It was not too long after their deployment, though, that reports of anomalous currents were observed which could at times prohibit communication or could enable a system to be run without an electrical power source, or in more dramatic instances cause the recording paper to catch fire (see review by Boteler 2003 and references therein).  Similar effects continued to be noticed from time to time with the next generation of communication lines (coaxial cables).,
 Another system of artificial electrical circuits began to grow with the advent of electrical power systems. Just like the telegraphs, this complicated collection of circuits is threaded by naturally produced magnetic flux and just like the telegraphs, rapid variations of this magnetic flux during geomagnetic storms causes a naturally produced current to flow through the system.  This effect was first reported after the 24 March 1940 geomagnetic storm (Davidson, 1940; see also Germaine, 1940 for reports of effects on long-line communication cables).  Numerous large and moderate impacts to the grid have been reported over the years, including a power blackout in 1958 (Lanzerotti & Gregori, 1986), equipment tripping and voltage stability issues (4 August 1972), a nine-hour blackout in Canada and a transformer loss (13 March 1989 - see photo), and a blackout in Sweden during the October 2003 storm. (See Boteler, 2001, for a comprehensive compilation of effects).,
 Assessing the impact of geomagnetic storms on the electrical power grid involves a number of considerations.  The path for current flow that responds to the varying external currents in the upper atmosphere follows artificial current paths on the ground (the power lines) as well as various natural current paths (e.g. conducting structures below the ground and nearby bodies of water).  Once the natural current paths are accounted for, the net geoelectric field that is imposed on the artificial current paths results in a quasi D.C. (periods of 10 seconds to 10’s (tens) of minutes) current in the power lines.  These geomagnetically induced currents cause the ‘exciting current’ in power transformers to operate out of their designed range, resulting in saturation of the magnetic core material inside the transformer.  Once the core saturates, the transformer no longer provides any back ‘electromotive force’ (a kind of electrical inertia) and the currents and voltages in the windings become abnormally large. Depending on the transformer design, this can lead to heating of the surrounding structures due to induced ‘Eddy Currents’ which has the potential to damage parts of the transformer.  An additional impact of transformer saturation is that the voltages and currents no longer have a simple sinusoidal (60 cycle) form and this can cause protective equipment elsewhere in the grid to trip when it shouldn’t.  These equipment ‘trips’ can take needed equipment off line and cause voltage stability problems.  An additional issue for the system is that all of the transformers that are saturating show up as a significant inductive load on the grid as a whole.  This means that a system that is near peak levels of demand prior to the geomagnetic storm event may not be able to meet the total power demand when the geomagnetic storm occurs, leading to partial or system wide blackouts.,
 Lanzerotti, L.J. and G.P. Gregori, Telluric currents: the natural environment and interactions with man-made systems; in The Earth’s Electrical Environment, (ed) R. Roble and E.P. Krider; National Academy Press, Washington D.C., pp 232-257, 1986,
 Satellite communication refers to any communication link that involves the use of an artificial satellite in its propagation path. Satellite communications play a vital role in modern life. There are over 2000 artificial satellites in use. They can be found in geostationary, Molniya, elliptical, and low Earth orbits and are used for traditional point-to-point communications, mobile applications, and the distribution of TV and radio programs. For a brief history of satellite communications see: https://www.britannica.com/technology/satellite-communication​. For details on communication satellite orbits and satellite communication applications see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communications_satellite.,
 Satellite communications tend to use high frequency signals: Ultra High Frequency (UHF), 300 MHz - 3 GHz and Super High Frequency (SHF), 3 - 30 GHz. Radio signals propagating to and from a satellite in orbit are affected by the environmental conditions along the propagation path. In a vacuum, radio signals propagate at the speed of light, but in the presence of plasma in the ionosphere, the signals are affected by group delay and phase advance and attenuation due to absorption and scintillation. The environment's effect on the signal is frequency dependent and to a first approximation is proportional to the amount of structure in the plasma present along the propagation path.,
 Due to ionospheric variability (Space Weather), the effects on propagating signals are highly variable. Up to some level, the effects of Space Weather on propagation can be mitigated through engineering design solutions, but space weather can lead to a total loss of communication due to attenuation and/or severe scintillation when the broadcast signals cross the ionosphere. In trans-ionosphere propagation, scintillation refers to the rapid variation of the amplitude and phase of a received signal. Scintillation is produced by structure in the ionosphere. The severity of scintillation depends on the frequency of the used signal and the spatial structure of plasma density and plasma drifts along the propagation path. Specifically, scintillation at the receiver is produced by constructive and destructive interference of refracted and diffracted components of the broadcast signal.,
 Submarine cables have become a vital component of modern infrastructure, but past submarine cable natural hazard studies have mostly focused on potential cable damage from landslides and tsunamis. A handful of studies examine the possibility of space weather effects in submarine cables. The main purpose of this study is to develop a computational model, using Python, of geomagnetic induction on submarine cables. The model is used to estimate the induced voltage in the submarine cables in response to geomagnetic disturbances. It also utilizes newly acquired knowledge from magnetotelluric studies and associated investigations of geomagnetically induced currents in power systems. We describe the Python-based software, its working principle, inputs/outputs based on synthetic geomagnetic field data, and compare its operational capabilities against analytical solutions. We present the results for different model inputs, and find: 1) the seawater layer acts as a shield in the induction process: the greater the ocean depth, the smaller the seafloor geoelectric field; and 2) the model is sensitive to the Ocean-Earth layered conductivity structure.,
 In 1722 and 1723 a London clockmaker, George Graham, observed daily and consistent variations on one of his instruments, a “Needle upon the Pin” (a compass), for which he had no explanation. Swedish scientists obtained some of Graham’s instruments to record what is now known to be the variations in Earth’s magnetic field. In 1741, they noticed a significant deflection of the compass needle during an aurora, thus connecting auroral phenomena with the Earth’s magnetic field for the first time.,
 Fast-forward 250 years. A new very sensitive seismometer, an instrument used to record earthquakes, was installed in 1991 at the Black Forest Observatory (BFO, Schiltach Germany). This was, and still is, one of the quietest locations in the world, with little outside noise that could contaminate the ground signals recorded by the seismometer. And yet… on February 21, 1994 a strong magnetic storm that was recorded on magnetometers throughout the planet was also recorded on the BFO seismometer. What follows is a story about an unusual marriage between instruments used to measure what’s above us (Earth’s magnetic field) and instruments used to measure what’s below us (earthquakes).,
 An aurora is a colorful light display in the night sky mostly in the polar regions caused by the interaction between the solar winds and particles in the magnetosphere. These events in turn, influence the geomagnetic field that exists in the Earth, which in turn influence the electrical currents in the Earth (and in our built electrical systems, see Keeping the Lights On in North America.) The study of geomagnetic storms is driven both by scientific curiosity and also by the need to understand and mitigate the risk they pose to electrical grids.,
 Aaron Lojewski, a local resident, was driving on a dark road near Fairbanks, Alaska on February 2, 2019 just after midnight when the sky “erupted” with mostly pink colors. He stopped his car and took a photograph that was published in the local newspaper. This auroral event was one of three that were used by U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and University of Alaska, Fairbanks scientists in one of two studies on the unusual connection between auroras, magnetometers (instruments that measure the Earth’s geomagnetic field), and seismometers (instruments that record the ground shaking during earthquakes). The space physicists and the seismologists were brought together by two different goals that turned out to have the same solution: 1) there are very few magnetometers around the world—and especially in remote arctic Alaska—because a geomagnetic observatory is very expensive; but we need more, and 2) there are a large number of seismometers around the world, and some of them record geomagnetic storms that are considered “noise” that needs to be removed.,
 Although it is well known that the ferro-magnetic material used in seismometers is sensitive to magnetic fluctuations, the exact influence had not been carefully analyzed. Geomagnetic signals are in the low frequency range, so seismic instruments that record in the low frequency range sometimes have a shield around them to block out the geomagnetic signals. But the shields are expensive, so they were not used on the 193 Transportable Array (TA) seismic stations that are currently in Alaska. The TA provided an excellent opportunity to observe the geomagnetic signal (“noise”) on this dense network in a region where space weather events (auroras) are frequent.,
 In one study, analysis of the data from the magnetometer and the seismometer at the permanent Global Seismographic Network (GSN) COLA station near Fairbanks showed that using a relatively inexpensive magnetometer to record the geomagnetic signal and then removing that “noise” from the seismic signal dramatically improved the seismic data. This approach worked for magnetometers up to 100-200km from the seismic station; variations of the geomagnetic field were too different from the seismometer location beyond that distance to be usable. During a magnetic storm, the magnetic signal is so strong compared to the background seismic signal that it can be detected on the seismometer. The COLA station is part of a network of 150 permanent seismometers around the world used by the USGS to locate earthquakes.,
 In the second study, the scientists used 6 all-sky cameras in Alaska that record optical data, in other words, photos of auroras; 8 magnetometer stations (several at the same sites as the cameras) to monitor space weather activity; and more than 200 seismic stations from the temporary TA stations and the permanent regional network in Alaska operated by the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. They focused on data from auroras on 3 different dates. The three different types of instruments all recorded the activity from the auroras, and the use of data from multiple seismometers allowed the seismic signal and the geomagnetic signal to be separated, providing geomagnetic data from locations where there were only seismometers.,
 In addition to the ability to use seismometers and inexpensive magnetometers to increase the density of data collected for geomagnetic activity, the GSN stations have 3 extra unused communication channels that could be used to send the geomagnetic data back to the central processing system immediately, providing additional realtime data to monitor space weather that may be negatively affecting power grids.,
 The outcome of the two studies results in a win-win situation for both seismologists and space physicists. Adding a relatively cheap magnetometer to each Alaska seismic station would result in better seismic data for earthquakes and also more geomagnetic data in real time for monitoring space weather.,
 Adam Ringler is a scientist at the Albuquerque Seismological Laboratory where he has been working since 2008.  He obtained his Ph.D. from the University of New Mexico in 2009.  He works on seismic instrumentation and data quality.  In his free time he enjoys rock climbing, skiing, and running with his wife.,
 Carl Tape grew up in Fairbanks, Alaska, and found his way back home in 2010. He develops and applies techniques in computational and observational seismology to obtain better images of Earth's internal structure and to obtain a better understanding of earthquakes. Improved seismic images can be used to help assess seismic hazard in earthquake-prone regions. While waiting for the next Alaska earthquake, he likes to explore the Alaskan Outdoors via running, hiking, and boating.,
 Dynamic events on the Sun’s surface can affect the Earth and technological systems of importance to modern society. The charged particles of the solar wind interact with the geomagnetic field of the Earth’s surrounding space environment. Usually, this interaction is relatively subdued, but every once in a while the Sun emits a burst of solar wind that causes the temporary disturbance in the Earth’s magnetic field – a magnetic storm.,
 Magnetic storms can wreak havoc on the electric power grids and communication lines. In September of 1859, a magnetic superstorm caused widespread interference to telegraph systems, even sparking fires at some telegraph stations. In March of 1989, an intense magnetic storm caused a black-out across Québec; in November of 2001 another storm caused the failure of electrical power transmission in New Zealand; and yet another in October of 2003, called the Halloween storm, brought significant interference to the power-grid system in Sweden. Several studies, including one issued by the National Academy of Sciences, suggest that the future occurrence of a magnetic superstorm could cause widespread blackouts that would carry a significant economic cost.,
 A hazard is the probability that a dangerous natural phenomenon will occur in a given window of time, with a certain size, and in a given location. So, for example, a 100-year geoelectric hazard is the amplitude of the geoelectric field that is only attained or exceeded at a given location once per century on average. The 100-year geoelectric hazard level is the standard used by electric utility companies for investigating the resilience of their systems to the effects of rare, but very intense magnetic storms. Maps of 100-year geoelectric hazards assist utility company engineers as they examine which parts of distributed power-grid networks are more exposed, or, conversely, less exposed, to the deleterious effects of magnetic storms.,
 The geoelectric hazard at any particular location depends on both the regional intensity of geomagnetic activity and on the electrical conductivity of the surrounding rock and deeper Earth material. To create a geoelectric hazard map, research scientists of the U.S. Geological Survey’s Geomagnetism Program analyze historical records of magnetic storms acquired at long-running magnetic observatories, including those operated by the USGS across the continental United States. This analysis is then combined with magnetotelluric measurements of the relationship between geomagnetic activity and the induced geoelectric field, such as those that have been made at various geographic sites across the continental United States as part of the National Science Foundation’s EarthScope project.,
 Recently, Geomagnetism Program scientists have concentrated on regional mapping of geoelectric hazards across the Pacific Northwest and the Eastern United States. This work shows that geoelectric hazards maps are closely correlated with geologic structures. During a magnetic storm, conducting rock allow currents to flow in the Earth in response to a weak geoelectric field. These currents flow relatively easily through rock that is relatively electrically conductive, and less easily through rock that is relatively resistive. All of this means that, during a magnetic storm, electric currents, driven by geoelectric fields in the Earth, will tend to be diverted through electric power grids if they are situated atop the electrically resistive rock.,
 By integrating the geoelectric field induced during a magnetic storm along a power-grid line, one can estimate the voltage on the line. During an intense magnetic storm, hundreds, and even thousands, of volts can be generated on long power lines. These voltages are not the carefully controlled alternating voltages provided by generating stations, and, indeed, geomagnetically induced voltages can drive uncontrolled currents on power grids that are of sufficient strength to damage transformers. If many transformers are damaged, as might happen during a magnetic superstorm, the result could be prolonged loss of electric power across a broad region of the United States.,
 An important ongoing project of the USGS and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is the real-time mapping of geoelectric fields across the continental United States. To accomplish this, real-time maps of the geomagnetic field, created using data from magnetic observatories, are combined with magnetotelluric survey measurements to estimate the time-varying geoelectric field. These geoelectric field maps will assist utility companies with their real-time operations – enabling the assessment of geoelectric hazards as they evolve over the course of a magnetic storm and helping power-grid managers to make decisions that may minimize the impact to their systems.,
 Jeffrey J. Love has been a research geophysicist at the USGS since 2001. He analyzes geomagnetic hazards of concern to the electric-power grid industry. Jeffrey is also interested in art, history, and home repair.,
 Greg Lucas is currently a Mendenhall Postdoctoral Fellow at the USGS. He has been investigating how geomagnetic fields induce voltages within the electric power grid. In his spare time, Greg enjoys running and biking on the local trails around Golden.,
 Paul A. Bedrosian has been a research geophysicist at the USGS since 2005. His toolbox includes a range of ground and airborne techniques, which he applies to problems ranging from framework tectonics to groundwater resources to volcanic hazards. In his spare time, he enjoys cooking, gardening, hiking, and skiing as well as visiting the many fine brewpubs that Colorado has to offer.,
 Anna Kelbert is a research geophysicist at the USGS since 2015. Her specialty is the electrical conductivity of the Earth's crust and mantle, and geophysical inverse methods that allow \peeking\ deep into the Earth using the data collected at the surface. In her spare time, Anna enjoys hiking, gardening, ballroom dancing, philosophy, and (now that she's in Colorado) skiing with her two children.,
 E. Joshua Rigler has been a research geophysicist at the USGS since 2011. He applies advanced statistics, signal processing, and machine learning techniques to geomagnetic time series analysis and hazard assessments. Josh is also interested in snowboarding, woodworking, science fiction, and convincing his two young children that all this is actually cool.,
 The F10.7 Index has proven very valuable in specifying and forecasting space weather.   Because it is a long record, it provides climatology of solar activity over six solar cycles.  Because it comes from the chromosphere and corona of the sun, it tracks other important emissions that form in the same regions of the solar atmosphere.   The Extreme UltraViolet (EUV) emissions that impact the ionosphere and modify the upper atmosphere track well with the F10.7 index.  Many Ultra-Violet emissions that affect the stratosphere and ozone also correlate with the F10.7 index.  And because this measurement can be made reliably and accurately from the ground in all weather conditions, it is a very robust data set with few gaps or calibration issues.,
  Faraday's disk dynamo  Faraday showed that another way of inducing the current was to move the electric conductor while the magnetic source stood still. This was the principle behind his disk dynamo, which featured a conducting disk spinning in a magnetic field--you may imagine it to be spun up by some belt and pulley, not drawn here. The electric circuit was then completed by stationary wires touching the disk on its rim and on its axle, shown on the right side of the drawing. This is not a very practical dynamo design (unless one seeks to generate huge currents at very low voltages), but in the large-scale universe, most currents are apparently produced by motions of this sort.,
 Faraday even speculated (incorrectly) that the flow of the Gulf Stream in the Atlantic Ocean was somehow electrically linked to the high atmosphere, powering there an electric discharge which (in his view) was the polar aurora (\Northern Lights\).,
   Faraday's disk dynamo needs a magnetic field in order to produce an electric current. Is it possible for the current which it generated to also produce the magnetic field which the dynamo process required?  That, in a nutshell, was what Larmor proposed was happening in sunspots.,
   At first sight this looks like a \chicken and egg\ propostion: to produce a chicken, you need an egg, but to produce an egg you need a chicken--so which of these came first? Similarly here--to produce a current, you need a magnetic field, but to produce a magnetic field you need a current. Where does one begin? Actually, weak magnetic fields are always present and would be gradually amplified by the process, so this poses no obstacle. ,
   One could, for instance, link two Faraday dynamos, each supplying the current needed to produce the other's magnetic field. They could (in principle) form a feasible self-excited dynamo, deriving its energy from whatever force was turning the disks. However, whether a fluid dynamo could mimic this behavior--e.g. swirls of fluid flow in a tank of liquid mercury--is a much harder question and took decades to resolve.,
     Elizabeth I  Under Queen Elizabeth I the city became a prosperous center of commerce. The defeat of the Spanish Armada (1588) opened the way to the British settlement of North America, where a short-lived colony had already existed1585-7 on Roanoke Island, now in North Carolina. The second attempt, in 1606 at Jamestown Virginia, took root. The big news of 1600 was the downfall of the Earl of Essex, once Elizabeth's favorite; he was executed in 1601.,
      The city was congested and unsanitary, and rats carrying bubonic plague thrived in it. Outbreaks usually ocurred in the summer, and at such time the royal court sometimes prudently retreated to the countryside. Physicians such as William Gilbert had their hands full, but they could do little and were unaware of the role of the rats. Gilbert, appointed royal physician in 1601, himself died of the plague in 1603.,
      Shakespeare's creative genius was in full bloom in 1600. He put on his plays in the Globe theatre, a ring-shaped structure built in 1599 on the banks of the Thames from the remains of an earlier theatre. His plays of the 1599-1600 season were Julius Ceasar, 12th Night and As You Like It; in 1600-1 came Hamlet and Merry Wives of Windsor. It is quite likely that Gilbert attended at least some of those plays.,
     Given two magnets, Gilbert knew that magnetic poles can attract or repel, depending on polarity. In addition, however, ordinary iron is always attracted to a magnet--even soft iron, which loses all its magnetism again when it is removed again. ,
       Gilbert guessed, correctly, that near a permanent magnet such iron became a temporary magnet, of a polarity suitable for attraction. That is, the end of an iron bar stuck to an S pole of a magnet (south-seeking pole) temporarily becomes an N-pole. Because magnetic poles always come in matched pairs, the other end of the bar temporarily becomes an S-pole, and can in its turn attract more iron. ,
       You see this if you dip (say) a horseshoe magnet into a cup with iron pins. As expected. many pins will stick to the poles, but in addition, some more pins will stick to those pins. Yet when the pins are pulled loose, they all are seen to be non-magnetic again. ,
       Gilbert confirmed his guess of temporary (\induced\) magnetism by an original experiment (see drawing). Using strings, he hung two parallel iron bars above the pole of a terrella, and noted that they repelled each other. Under the influence of the terrella, each became a temporary magnet with the same polarities, and the temporary poles of each bar repelled those of the other one.,
      You will need (1) a small button magnet (drawing), of the type made of steel and used to pin messages to metal partitions in offices (not a flat refrigerator magnet, too weak), and (2) two thin finishing nails, the long kind with small heads, about 5 cm (2\) long. If these are not available, find two thin long nails and cut or saw off their heads, leaving equal lengths.,
 Place the magnet on a flat table or the surface of a projector, as drawn, with the attracting pole-ends downwards (the figure is drawn in the plane of the table or projector). Stick the point of one nail to the side of one pole of the magnet, perpendicular to it. Restrain the nail with your fingers from moving off-perpendicular, as it tends to do when it tries to increase its surface contact with the magnet.,
 Put the point of the second nail next to it, and use thumb and forefinger to hold the two nails together, parallel. Now separate the fingers slightly, as shown, and note that the ends of the nails repel each other, as in Gilbert's drawing. By closing and opening the spacing between thumb and forefinger, you can easily demonstrate the repulsion.,
   Carl Friedrich Gauss    In a 1828 meeting Humboldt suggested to the greatest German mathematician of his time, Carl Friedrich Gauss, that he ought to apply his talents to the mysteries of magnetism. Gauss and his associate Weber then built a laboratory to study magnetism, in which, among other things, they devised the world's first magnetic telegraph.,
     Up to that time, the compass needle--and the downward-pointing \dip needle\ on a horizontal axis--measured well the direction of the magnetic force, but what about measuring its strength? Gauss devised a clever method for doing so, using an auxiliary magnet; today this is a popular undergraduate lab excercise. ,
    The new tools for better observation and description of the Earth's magnetic field led to better, world-wide observations.  Gauss and Weber organized a \Magnetic Union\ for setting up observatories, and Humboldt enlisted Russia's Czar to create a chain of them across Siberia. The greatest help however came from the British empire, whose \Magnetic Crusade\ led by Sir Edward Sabine set up stations from Canada to Tasmania (then known as \Van Diemen's Land\). The vast network not only made possible the first global models of the field, but also demonstrated the world-wide character of magnetic storms.,
    One can compare today's magnetic models, some of them based on satellite observations, to the ones started by Gauss more than 150 years ago. One trend then stands out: the dominant \dipole\ field is getting weaker, at about 5% per century (the rate might have increased since 1970). In the unlikely event that the trend continues unchanged, about 1500-2000 years from now the magnetic polarity of the Earth would reverse.,
     However, the magnetic field of Earth is not likely to disappear, because the high electrical conductivity of the core demands that the magnetic flux entering the core can only change very, very slowly (more about \flux\ below). As the late Ned Benton has shown (together with Coerte Voorhies), even though such conservation does not allow flux entering the core to disappear, it may be redistributed--perhaps replacing the big bundle of the dipole with a number of more complex ones (4-pole, 8-pole, etc.).  Such replacement yields weaker fields on the surface, and meanwhile the dominant \dipole\ pattern may (sometimes) reverse, later growing again to dominate the pattern but (possibly) with the main magnetic poles reversed. ,
        If you had done the same with areas where field lines exit from the core, it can be shown that you would have got the same result, but with minus sign, denoting flux leaving instead of entering. If you ignore the sign and mark every contribution as positive, you get exactly the same flux. Calculating the otal unsigned flux\ at the core surface gives the sum of the two--the otal unsigned flux,\ equal to twice the entering magnetic flux, and therefore, also (very very nearly) unchanged with time.  The otal unsigned flux\ is however easier to derive (which is why geomagneticians prefer working with it), because you no longer need to divide the surface into irregular patches of incoming and outgoing field lines--every bit of area is used in the calculation.-----------------------,
    A typical electromagnet, such as is used in a relay or machinery, has an iron core around which the current-carrying coil is wound.  The coil's magnetic field is greatly strengthened by the iron, because the iron atoms (or arrays of such atoms arranged in crystals) are magnetic. ,
    In ordinary iron, the magnetic axes of its atoms point in random directions, and the sum of their magnetic fields is close to zero. When current flows in the coil, however, its magnetic field lines up the magnetic axes of atoms in the core, and they add their magnetism to the one created by the electric current alone, making it much stronger.,
     Materials exist--certain ferrites--where saturation occurs abruptly and completely, at a stably defined level. If a large enough alternating current is driven through a coil wrapped around a core of such material, the core's magnetic polarity flip-flops back and forth, and saturation occurs in each half of the cycle, in symmetric fashion.,
     If however such an electromagnet is located in an existing magnetic field, directed (entirely or in part) along the axis of the ferrite core, that symmetry is upset. In the half of the cycle in which the field of the coil is added to the existing magnetization, saturation arrives a bit earlier, because it depends on the total magnetic intensity, external plus that of the coil. In the other half of the cycle, where the magnetization due to the coil opposes that of the existing field, it happens a bit later, because the sum of the two is somewhat weaker than the field of the coil alone.  That asymmetry can be sensed electronically, and this is the basis of the operation of the fluxgate magnetometer.,
     It does not sound like a sensitive effect--but it can be made quite sensitive by various tricks (e.g. replacing the rod-like magnetic cores with rings). A typical intensity of the magnetic field near the Earth's surface is 50,000 nanotesla (nT), while the fluxgate aboard Voyager 2 has observed with fair accuracy the interplanetary magnetic field near Uranus or Neptune, typically 100,000 times weaker. The Voyager 2 instrument resides at the end of a long boom, keeping it away from the magnetic interference of the currents aboard the spacecraft. Even though such currents are quite weak, they create enough of a magnetic field to disturb the readings of the sensitive magnetometer.,
      Such instruments must be calibrated against known fields from a coil or in some other way.    Other types of electronic instruments also exist, e.g. those based on optical properties of certain metal vapors, but they are beyond the scope of this quick overview. Another kind  is the proton precession magnetometer, briefly described in a lesson plan of the web course \From Stargazers to Starships\ and involving the process of precession. It is the basis of \magnetic resonance imaging,\ a medical procedure for viewing \soft\ internal organs which x-rays cannot observe, without any of the radiation damage which x-rays cause .,
     Perhaps the most striking use of such an instrument was in the medical experiments of Dr. David Cohen at the Massachussetts Institute of Technology (MIT).  Cohen's lab was lined with screening coils whose current canceled most of the outside geomagnetic field.  Inside the lab he built a small room which shielded out any remaining magnetic influence. It had five sets of walls nested one inside the other, like Russian matrioshka dolls, separated by alternate layers of iron (to keep out constant magnetic fields) and aluminum (to shield against electromagnetic fluctuations).  ,
     No detectable magnetic field reached the interior of the room, and some extremely sensitive magnetic observations could be conducted there. Cohen experimented there with magnetic signals from the heart and the brain, but his most intriguing result, published in 1979, concerned the human lungs.  Air passages in the human body are lined with hair-like cilia, constantly waving back and forth and thus slowly sweeping out any dirt or debris deposited in them (Cohen called them he moving carpet\).  To find how well the lungs cleaned themselves in this fashion, Cohen had a dozen volunteers inhale small amounts of iron oxide dust, which is harmless but can be magnetized.  ,
     Over the year that followed the quantity of dust remaining in their lungs was measured periodically, as follows.  First each subject stood between a pair of coils, through which a large current was briefly passed.  This magnetized the dust grains inside the lungs and lined them up in the same direction; since the grains gradually shifted out of alignment, they needed to be remagnetized at each visit.  The subjects then climbed into the shielded room, where the strength of the magnetization of their chest area was measured.,
      During the year of observations the amount of dust declined steadily in all subjects, first steeply and then more gradually, ending at about 10% of the original level. This showed that the lungs cleaned away debris quite efficiently.  The surprise came from 3 additional subjects, added  as an afterthought, all of them heavy smokers.  Their lungs cleaned themselves much more slowly, and after one year, about 50% of the dust still remained. ,
    Cohen concluded that heavy smoking not only deposited tars in the lungs but also impaired their capacity to clean themselves.  He speculated this might explain why a combination of heavy smoking and exposure to asbestos was associated with lung cancer far more frequently than might be expected by simply adding together the effects of smoking and asbestos separately. Not only did the asbestos promote cancer, but the tobacco tars and smoke hampered the natural process by which the lungs were sweeping it away.,
       Henry Gellibrand (soft \g\) published in 1635 evidence that this difference slowly changed with time. That was an unsettling discovery. It meant that observations of the local compass bearing became inaccurate after some decades and therefore had to be repeated from time to time.,
       And from a theoretical angle, how could the magnetic properties of the Earth undergo such gradual change? No known magnet behaved that way. Edmond Halley, of comet fame, came up in 1692 with an ingenious explanation. The interior of the Earth, he claimed, consisted of layers, spheres within spheres. Each sphere was independently magnetized, and each rotated slowly with respect to the others.,
       In 1724 George Graham found that the compass needle sometimes veered off by a small angle, for a day or so; a century later Alexander von Humboldt would name such events magnetic storms. That effect was widespread: Anders Celsius in Uppsala observed one at the same time as Graham in London, and a century later it was found to be world-wide. Celsius and his student Hiorter also observed magnetic disturbances linked to the orthern lights\ (polar auroras); in our time, such events are associated with \magnetic substorms.\,
       All that time, the only kind of magnetism known was the permanent magnetism of magnetized iron or of lodestones. The magnetic force due to the magnetic pole at the end of a magnet seemed a bit like gravity or the electric force, growing weaker in proportion to 1/r2, with r the distance from the pole. This \inverse square\ relationship was confirmed in 1777 by Charles Coulomb in France, through experiments with a magnetic needle suspended on a twistable string--an instrument which Coulomb introduced, the prototype of most magnetic detectors in the following 170 years.,
       The main difference was that while gravity only attracted, magnetism could also repel. Jonathan Swift (1726) satirically proposed that such a repulsion could act as \anti-gravity,\ keeping an island floating in space, as told in the story of the 3rd voyage of \Gulliver's Travels.\,
  But the notion of a scientific textbook was unfamiliar when De Magnete first appeared in 1600.  Certainly scientific subjects and even geomagnetism had been written about  (e.g. by Petrus Peregrinus in his Epistola de Magnete,  1269), but as reports of equipment and phenomena rather than as in-depth investigations of a subject, with experimental evidence and interpretation.  So there was no yardstick against which to measure De Magnete.   Recall that it was not until 1687 that Newton's Principia was published; De Magnete also predates Kepler's Astronomia Nova (1609), in which he enunciated the first two of his three laws of planetary motion, and Galileo's Sidereus Nuncius (1610), in which the earliest telescopic observations of astronomical objects were reported. ,
      William Gilbert (1544-1603) was the eldest of Jerome Gilbert's eleven children: four from his first marriage and seven from a second.  Confusingly these included a second William who, even more confusingly, erected a memorial tablet to \our\ William, but with his year of birth erroneously given as 1540.   The family lived in Colchester, some 50 miles NE of London, where Jerome held the prestigious post of Recorder.  William received a gentleman's education at St John's College, Cambridge, where he remained for 11 years until 1569, acquiring bachelor's and master's degrees, qualification as a medical doctor and a Senior Fellowship.  This was followed by a four-year \Grand Tour\ of Europe, mostly spent in Italy, before he settled in London in 1573 to practice medicine.  His medical career was spectacularly successful, culminating with presidency of the Royal College of Physicians in 1599 and appointment as physician to Queen Elizabeth I in 1601.  The Queen died two years later, though no blame for this attaches to Gilbert, who continued to be Royal Physician (to James VI and I) until his own death by plague 8 months later.  It is of interest to note that Mark Ridley, a slightly younger geomagnetician (and acquaintance of Gilbert's, whom he commended as the greatest discoverer in magnetical science), was also a royal physician - in his case to the Tsar of Muscovy, Boris Godunov. ,
      Gilbert's achievements as a doctor would have been enough to secure his fame, but he is remembered today for his investigations into magnetism and electricity, which he reported in De Magnete.  These investigations were conducted from about 1581 to 1600, in parallel with his medical career.  The experiments were made and discussed with like-minded friends who met in his house for this purpose; a pattern similar to that followed half a century later which led to the foundation of the Royal Society.  Although magnetism was essentially a hobby, it was one that Gilbert, who never married, took very seriously and on which he expended large sums of money (£5000 according to William Harvey) for instruments and equipment. ,
      The book itself is a handsome production, well illustrated with woodcuts and various printing devices such as illuminated letters at the start of each chapter.  Marginal asterisks, of two sizes, draw attention to points of particular importance.   After an author's preface, by Gilbert, and an encomiastic preface, by Edward Wright, there are 115 chapters, sometimes of only one paragraph, arranged in 6 books.  Edward Wright (1558?-1615) is famous for putting Mercator's projection on a sound mathematical footing.  The book is not unlike a modern PhD thesis in layout, starting with a survey of previous work, moving on to experimental results, discussing these and setting them in the broader context of worldwide results, and ending with speculation and unsolved problems. ,
      The first book starts with an historical survey, then reviews the basic magnetic properties of a lodestone (poles, attraction and repulsion, magnetisation of iron) and ends with the famous chapter on the Earth itself being a great magnet. There is an interesting discussion of the medicinal properties of iron and lodestone, in which it is concluded that magnetism plays no part, since: \when drunk in a draught\ [lodestone does not] \avail to attract or repel\. ,
      In the second book a clear distinction is drawn between the attractive properties of magnets and rubbed amber: \for it pleases us to call that an electric force\.  Many magnetic and static-electric experiments are reported, including investigations of the effects of interposed material, shape of lodestone and the effect of \arming\ the poles with iron caps.  Much folklore is refuted, not least the possibility of a perpetual motion machine: \O that the gods would at length bring to a miserable end such fictitious, crazy, deformed labours, with which the minds of the studious are blinded! \ ,
      Book three is concerned with the directive properties of a magnet, but also with details of the magnetisation of needles and the distribution of magnetism in a terrella (Gilbert's word for a spherical lodestone).  The terrella experiments are of particular importance, since it was these that led Gilbert to draw the analogy between the magnetic field of the Earth and that of a terrella. ,
      This introduction to geomagnetism is developed in more detail in book 4 (on declination, which was then known as \variation\) and book 5 (on dip, which Gilbert calls declination). ,
      The final book is more speculative.  It concerns stellar and terrestrial motions, which Gilbert erroneously associates with magnetism and believes that this adds support to the Copernican theory.  This was unacceptable to religious views at the time and many of the European copies of  De Magnete have had Book 6 removed or defaced.  Nevertheless, the idea of action at a distance for controlling the planetary motions was seminal for Hooke's and Newton's thoughts about gravity. ,
      But a mere list of its contents can give only a hint of the book.  It is constantly necessary to remind oneself while reading it of just how early it is.  Here is Baconian science, based on experiment and observation rather than hearsay, being practised twenty years before the publication of Bacon's Novum Organum.   And, over a hundred years before it ceased to be an offence punishable by flogging for a British naval helmsman to have garlic on his breath for fear of demagnetising the ship's compass, De Magnete dismisses as \fable and falsehood\ the idea that a lodestone smeared with garlic loses its power.  All this at a time when it was heresy to set experiment against the teachings of the church; indeed, it was also in 1600 that the philosopher Giordano Bruno was burnt at the stake for heresy.  Admittedly, things were more relaxed in England than in Italy, but it was still courageous, perhaps even foolhardy, to publish such a book. ,
      The quoted price of De Magnete may be a little misleading as, even without the benefit of this review, all four Latin editions, of 1600, 1628, 1633 and 1892 (a facsimile of the first edition) are sold out.  While second-hand copies occasionally appear at auction, they are not cheap: a good first edition was recently (January 1998) sold for $15,000.  The 1900 Chiswick Press edition in English (translated by Thompson) was limited to 250 copies and is now virtually unobtainable, but was reprinted in facsimile in 1958 by Basic Books, edited and with an introduction by Derek J. de Sola Price.  A reprint of Mottelay's translation was published by Dover in 1958 and is still in print. ,
      Once the reader has got used to its inevitably archaic style, De Magnete is a surprisingly readable book.  There is no need to commend it to historians of science as they will already have read it.  But any geophysicist would not only benefit from, but also enjoy reading it. ,
    What if no lodestones existed?  The Chinese would certainly not have invented the magnetic compass. Magnetism would have been discovered much later, and one wonders how. Lacking the compass, the great voyages of discovery could hardly have taken place--Columbus, De Gama, Magellan and the rest. The history of the world might have been quite different! ,
   Chemically and mineralogically, the lodestone is magnetite, a massive type of iron ore, an oxide of iron, a mineral related the the brown stuff coating the magnetic disks and tapes used by computers. Magnetite is quite common in nature, while lodestones are relatively rare. Why are a few rare pieces of it different from the rest? ,
       Lightning, from the Langmuir Lab  Dr. Peter Wasilewski, of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, believes he has the answer.      First, he showed, not all magnetite can become a lodestone: a certain composition and crystal structure are required. But even then, just resting a few million years in the Earth's magnetic field would produce no magnetization. ,
   Dr. Wasilewski believes that is what happens when a chunk of the appropriate ore is struck by lightning. Lightning is a discharge of cloud electricity, a large electric current lasting just a fraction of a second, but during that time it produces a strong transient magnetic field. ,
   The idea was tested at a unique facility of the New Mexico Institute of Technology, the Langmuir laboratory. That lab, a center of lightning studies, was built on top of South Baldy Mountain near Soccorro, New Mexico, the location of frequent lightning strikes. By placing mineral samples where lightning would hit them, Dr. Wasilewski turned magnetite with appropriate crystalline structure into lodestones. ,
   William Gilbert had a clue to this process, but not surprisingly, he missed its significance. In \De Magnete\ he cited the following passage from a book published in Italy: ,
 In hindsight we would guess that the church tower had been hit by lightning, which magnetized the iron. Gilbert however attributed it to long-term exposure to the Earth's  magnetism, \by the turning of its extremities towards the poles for so long a time.\ ,
  \Verticity\ here means magnetization. The observation is quite accurate: above a certain temperature (\Curie point\), iron loses all its magnetism; then, when it is cooled back past that temperature, it \captures\ the magnetism existing in its surroundings, due to the poles of the Earth. Its \verticity\ is nowhere as strong as the one produced by a stroke of lighning. Still, as Gilbert observed, in a long iron rod that magnetism was channeled to the ends, where it could be noted. ,
    Magnetism \captured\ by hot material that cools down in the presence of the Earth's magnetic influence has played an important role in the more recent discovery of plate tectonics, discussed in a later section of this web site. A similar cooling process may also be responsible for the patchy magnetization observed on the surfaces of Mars and the Moon. ,
      Compass directions above   different parts of Gilbert's terrella        Of his own experiments, the most important was conducted with a magnetized errella\ (\little Earth\), a spherical magnet serving as a model for the Earth. By moving a small compass over the surface of the terrella, Gilbert reproduced the directional behavior of the compass; reputedly, he also demonstrated this in front of Queen Elizabeth and her court. ,
    The supposed magnetic    attraction of land masses Gilbert ascribed the deviation of the compass needle from true north to the attraction of the continents, which tallied with observations in the Northern Atlantic--the needle veered eastwards near Europe, westwards near America. Noting that near the islands of Novaya Zemlaya, north of Russia, the compass needle pointed west of true north, Gilbert speculated that a orth-east passage\ around Russia might exist, giving more direct access by sea to the spice islands of the Far East. Some decades earlier, Frobisher and Davis had sought in vain a similar orth-west passage\ around the American continent,
        The last of the 6 \books\ into which Gilbert's work is divided deals with the motion of Earth in space and its possible connection to magnetism. Here Gilbert voiced complete support of Copernicus, he Restorer of Astronomy,\ which made the book somewhat controversial. Galileo, who praised \De Magnete,\ obtained his copy of it as a gift from \a peripatetick philosopher of great fame, as I believe, to free his library of its contagion.\,
     Gilbert thus believed the Earth rotated because it was magnetic. P.M. Blackett, who won the 1948 Nobel prize for his work on cosmic rays, seriously considered the opposite possibility--that the Earth was magnetic because it rotated around its axis. Blackett at one time suggested that perhaps a new universal phenomenon existed--that any rotating object was intrinsically magnetized. ,
       At first this did not seem such a wild idea. Electrons and protons, for instance, do have an intrinsic \spin\ giving them properties like those of a rotating solid object, and they also have an intrinsic magnetization, making them tiny magnets, lined-up with their spin axes. In ordinary materials, such atomic magnets point in all possible directions, so that their effects cancel. ,
        Energy is the currency with which most processes in nature must be paid for.  The Earth's magnetism is no exception, and its energy seemes to come from fluid motions in the Earth's core, from circulating flows that help get rid of heat produced there. In a similar way, our weather is driven by circulating air flows that help cool the ground, where much of sunlight is absorbed. ,
       Scientists are still not sure about what provides the heat in the Earth's core. It might come from some of the iron becoming solid and joining the inner core, or perhaps it is generated by radioactivity, like the heat of the Earth's crust. The flows are very slow, and the energy involved is just a tiny part of the total heat energy contained in the core. ,
       So the molten metal is believed to be circulating.  By moving through the existing magnetic field, it creates a system of electric currents, spread out through the core, somewhat like Faraday's disk dynamo,  discussed earlier. Currents create a magnetic field--a distribution of magnetic forces--and the essence of the self-sustaining dynamo problem is to find solutions such that the resulting magnetic field is also the input field required for generating the current in the first place. ,
       Actually, that is only the lowest level of the problem, in which one is free to prescribe the motions. To solve the full problem,  we also need information about the heat sources, and these sources must be able to drive motions which also solve the dynamo problem. ,
       The rotation of the Sun around its axis, therefore, does not by itself contribute to its magnetism. What is important in this case is that the Sun does not rotate like a solid ball. Its equator has a shorter rotation period than higher latitudes-- about 25 days for the equator, 27 days for latitude 40 degrees (the Earth meanwhile moves some distance around the Sun, so from here the period seems to be 27 and 29 days). If Earth rotated that way, Florida (for instance) would soon pull away from the rest of the US, into the Atlantic Ocean. Such an uneven motion, deforming the surface, can drive a dynamo, and in the Sun's case, it is indeed believed to be the source of sunspot magnetism. ,
 Walter Elsasser, at the University of Utah (later at Johns Hopkins) launched in the 1940s a frontal attack on the full 3-dimensional problem. He got nowhere: the equations became more and more intricate and complicated the further one went into the details. Others had similar experiences. Only in 1964 did Stanislaw Braginsky in Russia publish the first valid solutions, by assuming that the field was almost axially symmetric and calculating its small deviations from symmetry. ,
       The solution of the full problem,  including heat flow, is much harder. Not only are we unsure of the source of heat, but any motions caused by it are greatly modified by the Earth's rotation. That modification is a major feature of large-scale motions in the atmosphere, causing hurricanes and storm systems to swirl in their characteristic ways. Eugene Parker in 1955 proposed a mechanism by which such swirling, in the rising flows of the Sun's atmosphere, could create dynamo fields. ,
       As viewed from above, the swirling direction of storms in the atmosphere is always counterclockwise north of the equator and clockwise south of it. Such asymmetry is also expected in rising flows in the Earth's core, and Steenbeck et al., in Germany, showed in 1966 that thanks to it, disordered convection patterns can indeed produce an average \dynamo field. \ That became known as the \alpha effect, \ because it involved a mathematical quantity denoted by the Greek letter a (alpha)--but the details are far too complicated to be described here. ,
       A Japanese team of Takahashi et al (Science, 309, p. 459-61, 15 July 2005) has more recently used one of the worlds fastest supercomputers to carry out a similar calculations assuming a much lower fluid viscosity in the core, much closer to the actual one.  The behavior seems even closer to the one observed.,
       Birkeland's terrella     Kristian Birkeland, a Norwegian physicist, took in 1895 a hint from William Gilbert and placed a terrella--a magnetized sphere representing the Earth--in a vacuum chamber made of glass. He then aimed a beam of electrons at the terrella (somewhat like the beam of electrons in a TV picture tube) and observed their path by means of the glow they produced in the residual air left in the chamber. The glow followed magnetic field lines (lines of force) and converged near the magnetic poles of the terrella. ,
      It indeed was.  The French mathematician Henri Poincaré--and 50 years later, in more detail, Hannes Alfvén in Sweden--analyzed the motion of such electrons and concluded that they were  guided by magnetic field lines, like beads strung on a wire. From his terrella experiment, Birkeland guessed that the aurora was caused by electrons from the Sun, which were guided by magnetic field lines to the Earth\s polar caps, and produced there a glow as they hit in the upper atmosphere. As it turned out, the Sun was not the source, but the rest of the guess was pretty close to the truth. ,
    Alfvén's theory suggested how this current could be carried. Charged particles, such as ions or electrons, were not only guided by magnetic field lines, but as they slid along such lines (more accurately, spiralled around them), they were also repelled (in a way) from regions of more intense magnetic field. ,
       Motion of a Trapped Particle   Field lines of the Earth, like those of a bar magnet, stretch from the vicinity of one magnetic pole to that of the other, and the magnetic force on each line is weakest halfway between the line's \footpoints\ on Earth, in the part where the line is most distant from Earth. Ions and electrons can be trapped in that weak field, bouncing back and forth, turned back each time they try to slide down into the more intense field which exists closer to Earth. ,
      One can show that by secondary processes, such particles also slowly change their attachment from one field line to its next neighbor, gradually circling the globe--clockwise (view from far north) for positive ions, counterclockwise for negative electrons. However, any time negative electrons move one way and positive ions the opposite way, an electric current is created! That was indeed how S.F. Singer in 1957 proposed to explain the existence of a ring current during magnetic storms. ,
       Regions of the Magnetosphere     The energy source of the ring current and of all its associated phenomena turned out to be the solar wind--a continuous flow of ions and electrons, spreading out in all directions from the Sun's topmost layer, the million-degree hot corona. Magnetic storms arise from unusually fast flows in the solar wind, especially those connected to explosive events associated with active sunspots. The solar wind compresses the magnetic field lines facing it on the day side of the Earth and confines those lines into a rounded cavity. In the opposite direction, on the night side, the same solar wind stretches field lines into a long \magnetotail\ and the cavity then becomes a long cylinder. ,
      It is this tail where many active phenomena of the magnetosphere--part of our \space weather\--originate. Of special interest is a thick layer known as the plasma sheet, spread in the region of weak magnetic field which is sandwiched between two bundles of magnetic field lines. One bundle, north of the equator, consists of field lines that head into the vicinity of the north magnetic pole, and the other bundle is its mirror image south of the equator, of field lines directed out of the southern polar cap. The plasma sheet is where ring current particles originate, and where \substorms\ shove particles earthward and create bright auroral displays. ,
      In space such currents most easily flow along magnetic field lines, because the particles that carry them (mainly electrons) tend to stay attached to such lines. Some flow from space to Earth, some from Earth to space, and near Earth their circuit is completed by a layer in the high atmosphere that conducts electricity well, the E-layer of the Earth\s ionosphere, located some 125 km above ground. The currents do not reach the ground, because air at lower levels is a very good electric insulator. ,
      The polar aurora is created by electrons moving earthward while carrying this current. They gain speed from the driving voltage and after reaching the atmosphere, smash into atoms of oxygen or nitrogen, causing them to emit light. The typical aurora has an eerie greenish glow, emitted by oxygen. ,
  Variation of the observed \sunspot number\   Vulcan doesn't exist--it was never seen in any total eclipse. However, after a decade and more of diligent observations, Schwabe found something that had eluded all astronomers of the preceding two centuries--since sunspots were first reported by Galileo and Christopher Scheiner. He found that the number of sunspots rose and fell in a nearly regular cycle, lasting about 11 years. Interestingly, it soon turned out that big \magnetic storms\ when the magnetic field was disturbed (typically by up to 1%) seemed to occur most frequently during the years with the most sunspots.,
     The evidence for sunspot magnetism was their emitted light. Glowing gases emit light in narrowly defined wavelengths (i.e. colors), a different set for each substance. In 1897, however, Pieter Zeeman found that when such light was emitted from the region of a strong magnetic field, the emission split into slightly different wavelengths, with a separation that increased with the strength of the field. The colors of the light emitted from sunspots were \split up\ in just this way. ,
     The method was later improved by Babcock and others, allowing astronomers to observe not only the magnetic field of sunspots but also the weak fields near the Sun's poles. It turned out that the Sun has a polar field somewhat like the Earth's, but that it reverses its polarity during each 11-year cycle.,
     Sunspots have also led us to a better understanding of the Earth's own magnetic field. The face of the Sun consists of ionized hot gas (\plasma\), hot enough to conduct electricity. Sunspot fields were evidently produced by electric currents, and it was well known that such currents could be generated by a \dynamo process,\ by the motion of an electric conductor (e.g. the flow of solar plasma) through a magnetic field.,
     In 1919 Sir Joseph Larmor proposed that the fields of sunspots were due to such dynamo currents. He suggested that a closed chain of cause-and-effect existed, in which the field created by these currents was also the field which made them possible, the field in which the plasma's motion generated the required currents. Many features of sunspots remain a mystery, but Larmor's idea opened an era of new understanding of magnetic processes in the Earth's core.,
   The early Chinese also knew about lodestones and about iron magnetized by them. Around the year 1000 they discovered that when a lodestone or an iron magnet was placed on a float in a bowl of water, is always pointed south. From this developed the magnetic compass, which quickly spread to the Arabs and from them to Europe. The compass helped ships navigate safely, even out of sight of land, even when clouds covered the stars. Compasses were also built into portable sundials, whose pointers had to face north to give the correct time.,
   The nature of magnetism and the strange directional properties of the compass were a complete mystery. For instance, no garlic was allowed on board ships, in the mistaken belief that its pungent fumes caused the compass to malfunction. Columbus felt the compass needle was somehow attracted by the pole star, which maintained a fixed position in the northern sky while the rest of the heavens rotated around it.,
    And second, the force on the needle was not horizontal but slanted downwards into the Earth. If a compass needle was balanced evenly on its pivot before being magnetized, then afterwards its north end would be pulled downwards, and a tip had to be snipped off to restore balance. This was studied by Robert Norman of London, England, who was drawn to investigate this, after snipping off too much of a needle he was preparing, and spoiling it. In 1581 he published his finding in a book, The Newe Attractive. ,
      That was before other planets in the solar system were visited and examined. Now we know that among those planets, only Venus lacks any magnetism. The planets differ greatly in size and properties, and their fields differ too. Yet they all seem to have dynamo fields, or (in the case of Mars and the Moon) have had them in the past. ,
      In 1959, after the Earth's radiation belt had been discovered, Frank Drake observed Jupiter and concluded from the relative intensities in a range of wavelengths that the signal was probably emitted by electrons trapped in a strong magnetic field. Then in 1973 the space probe Pioneer 10 passed by Jupiter and found there, sure enough, an enormous planetary magnetic field and a very intense radiation belt.,
     If the fields of Earth and Jupiter were both approximately represented by bar magnets at the planet's center, then Jupiter's magnet would be about 20,000 times stronger. Jupiter's magnetic axis, like the Earth, is slightly offset from the rotation axis, but while Jupiter and Earth (and other planets) spin in the same sense, the magnetic polarity of Jupiter is the opposite of Earth's. ,
     What produces that field is still unclear. No one knows what Jupiter's core consists of, but by one widely held theory, it is hydrogen, compressed by the huge weight of the planet's outer layers to the point at which it becomes a metal and conducts electricity. The strange radio signals observed by Franklin and Burke came from Jupiter's radiation belt, the most intense one in the solar system--so intense that after just one pass through it, Pioneer 10 suffered some (minor) radiation damage. Along with its radiation belt, Jupiter also has auroras, observed from Earth by the orbiting Hubble telescope. ,
   Jupiter   auroras  (bigger version)      Jupiter's magnetic field produces some interesting interactions with the planet's larger moons (which are bigger than ours). Io, the innermost large moon, is heated by its tides, a bizzare world with active sulphur volcanoes and a thin atmosphere. Its ionosphere and/or body conduct electricity, and the relative motion between Io and Jupiter's magnetosphere creates a dynamo circuit, which produces large currents flowing between them.,
      The space probe Voyager 1 passed close to those currents on March 5, 1979, and observed their magnetic fields. Those fields also affect Jupiter's radio emissions and cause the \signal\ which they beam to Earth to rise and fall, depending on the position of Io. More recent observations by the Galileo space probe also suggest that the moon Ganymede has its own magnetic field. Jupiter's magnetosphere at these distances rotates with the planet, and as it moves past Ganymede, that moon apparently carves out it it its own small magnetosphere. ,
      The magnetic axes of Uranus and Neptune, on the other hand, are inclined by about 60° to their rotation axes. The shape and properties of a planetary magnetosphere depends on the angle between the flow of the solar wind (i.e. the direction from the Sun) and the magnetic axis, and for those two planets, that angle is rapidly changing all the time. As a result, their magnetospheres undergo wild variations during each rotation, although both manage to contain trapped particles. The origin of all those field is unknown: Saturn is big enough to produce metallic hydrogen in its core, but Uranus and Neptune are not. ,
      The planet Venus was visited by Mariner 10 in 1974, which continued from there to Mercury. Venus was found to be unmagnetized: the solar wind is only stopped by its upper atmosphere, the ionosphere, creating a completely different type of magnetosphere, more like a comet's tail. On the other hand, tiny Mercury--an airless rock only moderately bigger than our Moon, rotating very slowly--surprised observers by being magnetized. Its magnetic field is weak and probably does not extend far enough to trap many particles, but as the spacecraft passed through its nightside tail, it observed a sudden spasm in which particles were apparently energized. To learn more about all this, NASA has scheduled the \Messenger\ mission to fly to Mercury and orbit it.     Mercury may actually have a molten core, and thus perhaps its field may be due to a dynamo effect, like Earth's. Mercury is slightly deformed like the Earth's Moon, but whereas our Moon's rotation period equals its orbital period, Mercury is locked into  a more complex pattern--3 rotations each 2 orbits.     Because Mercury's orbit is slightly elliptical, it also undergoes librations, causing the Sun to pull its elongated part. The librations differ whether the core is molten or not--if it is, the Sun's periodic pull is not transmitted so well to it and it rotates more smoothly. According to an article by Jean-Luc Margot et al., Science 316 , p. 710, 2007 (reported by Johanna Miller in \Physics Today\, July 2007, p. 22-4), this seems to be the case \with 90-95% certainty.\ The Messenger mission is expected to make the case more definite.      Mars and the Moon have permanently magnetized patches of rock on their surfaces, suggesting that even if they now lack a dynamo field, at some time in the past they possessed one. That would agree with the giant volcanoes (apparently extinct) observed on Mars, which suggest a hot interior. ,
   Magnetization of Mars: red in one direction,       blue in the opposite one.    For more details, see   Astronomy Picture of the Day, 4 May 1999     The magnetized patches on that planet, first observed by the Mars Global Surveyor, are particularly intriguing because they seem to form strips, reminding researchers of the magnetized strips observed on the sea bottom on Earth, from which the idea of plate tectonics emerged. Magnetic observations on Mars, however, are not yet detailed enough to allow any firm conclusions to be drawn. ,
      Planetary magnetic fields thus seem to be the rule, not the exception, at least in our solar system. About a thousand years have passed since the discovery of the magnetic compass gave the first hint of such fields. As their study enters its second millennium, it faces more unanswered questions than ever before. ,
     In 1820 Oersted arranged in his home a science demonstration to friends and students.  He planned to demonstrate the heating of a wire by an electric current, and also to carry out demonstrations of magnetism, for which he provided a compass needle mounted on a wooden stand.,
   What Oersted saw.   While performing his electric demonstration, Oersted noted to his surprise that every time the electric current was switched on, the compass needle moved.  He kept quiet and finished the demonstrations, but in the months that followed worked hard trying to make sense out of the new phenomenon.,
 (it gets further complicated if the currents flow in directions inclined to each other by some angle). To find then the force between wires of complicated shape that carry electrical currents, all these little bitty contributions to the force must be added up. For two straight wires, the final result is as above--a force inversely proportional to R, not to R2],
    The magnetic property becomes even stronger if a core of iron is placed inside the coils, creating an \electromagnet\; that requires enlisting the help of iron, but is not essential.,
     Most dry land has a modest elevation above sea level, while most of the ocean floor is about 3 kilometers (or 2 miles) lower down. The area of in-between depths, e.g. where the ocean is about 1 kilometer deep, is much less. An atlas will show that in the oceans around the continental US, for instance, for a certain distance from land the depth slowly increases, but then the sea-bottom plunges down steeply to the lower level, where it stays. ,
      What does this mean? It means that the surface of the Earth is not a single terrain, varying smoothly, part of which happens to stick out above water. Rather, its regions belong to one of two types.  The oceans tend to be uniformly deep, while the continents are separate chunks, thick enough to rise above water (or, at their edges, be covered by shallow seas). ,
      Wegener found other corresponding matches, e.g. between rock formations along matching edges, and in 1918 he proposed his theory of \continental drift\--that continents, like ice floes, drifted from one location to another. He believed the continents floated on deeper layers below them, which over millions of years gave way like a thick fluid and made the drift possible. The energy source was supposedly the internal heat of the Earth. ,
      Wegener's idea encountered enormous resistance from established geophysicists. Sir Harold Jeffreys in Britain, in particular, pointed out that the deeper layers were not nearly fluid enough and would strongly resist the proposed motion. After Wegener died on an arctic expedition in 1930, only a handful of loyal supporters continued to promote his ideas. More evidence was needed, and it came from the Earth's magnetism. ,
      Instruments can measure the magnetization of basalt. Therefore, if a volcano has produced many lava flows over a past period, scientists can analyze the magnetizations of the various flows and from them get an idea on how the direction of the local Earth's field varied in the past. Surprisingly, this procedure suggested that times existed when the magnetization had the opposite direction from today's. All sorts of explanation were proposed, but in the end the only one which passed all tests was that in the distant past, indeed, the magnetic polarity of the Earth was sometimes reversed. ,
 Please Note:This web site regularly receives questions about reversals.  Do they pose a danger to life on Earth? Is one due soon? How quickly do they take place? Click here to bring up four of those questions, with their answers.,
      Extending those measurements to the oceans, around 1960, revealed a surprising difference. In the ocean floor the magnetization was orderly, arranged in long strips.  The strips on the Atlantic ocean floor, in particular, all seemed parallel to the \mid-Atlantic ridge.\ That is a volcanic ridge running roughly north-to-south (with some zigs and zags), halfway between Europe-Africa and America. It is marked by the focus-points of earthquakes and by some volcanic islands, and more recently it was explored by research submarines, which have at times observed lava oozing out at its crest. ,
                   Ocean floor magnetization     (USGS figure)     Not only were the magnetic strips lined-up with the central ridge, but their structure and distribution seemed remarkably symmetric on both sides: if (say) a narrow-wide pair of strips was observed at a certain distance east of the ridge, its mirror image was also found at about the same distance to the west. ,
      As the \plates\ on each side are pulled away, lava emerges from the middle, solidifies and \records\ the prevailing magnetic field. The newly formed basalt sticks to the plates and is also pulled away--some of it towards Europe and Africa, some towards America. Every half million years, on the average, the Earth's magnetic polarity reverses, and so does the magnetization of the ocean floor. Each strip therefore represents an epoch of one or the other magnetic polarity, and the symmetry is also explained. It is as if the sea-floor was a giant tape recorder, with twin tapes emerging from the mid-Atlantic ridge, recording the Earth's magnetism at the time they emerge and then traveling in opposite directions.  Similar magnetic strips were also observed in all other oceans. ,
         Sea-floor spreading     (USGS figure)     If the sea-floor was moving, then continents adjoining them might share that motion, just as Wegener had guessed. The main difference now seems to be that rather than pushing their way through a semi-fluid on which they float, the continents (or some of them) ride on top of \conveyer belts\ in that fluid. These are the \plates\ which emerge at mid-ocean and go down again (at least in some cases) at the deep oceanic trenches, like the ones found near Japan or in the Caribbean Sea. ,
      The science of the shaping of the Earth's crust goes by the name ectonics,\ and the process described here is the essence of \plate tectonics\ by the Earth's crust consists of distinct plates which are continually rearranged, sometimes carrying along continents or parts of continents. The entire motion is indeed driven by the Earth's internal heat. ,
      The Pacific plate bordering California, for instance, is slowly rotating, moving northwards. The edge of California is attached to that plate and also moves northwards, but the bulk of the continent does not. The juncture between the two, where one slips by the other, follows in part the famous San Andreas fault. ,
     For geophysicists only:\Brunhes' Research Revisited: Magnetization of Volcanic Flows and Baked Clays,\ by Carlo Laj, Catherine Kisel and Hervé Guillou, Eos (Transactions of Amer. Geophysical Union), 27 August 2002,
 High altitude pilots and astronauts can experience higher levels of radiation during magnetic storms, but the hazard is due to the radiation, not the magnetic field itself. Geomagnetism can also impact the electrically based technology that we rely on, but it does not impact people themselves. ,
 Yes. There is evidence that some animals, like sea turtles and salmon, have the ability to sense the Earth's magnetic field (although probably not consciously) and to use this sense for navigation.,
 Electromagnetic variations have been observed after earthquakes, but despite decades of work, there is no convincing evidence of electromagnetic precursors to earthquakes. It is worth acknowledging that geophysicists would actually love to demonstrate the reality of such precursors, especially if they could be used for reliably predicting earthquakes! Learn more: USGS Geomagnetism Program,
 The mission of the U.S. Geological Survey's Geomagnetism Program is to monitor the Earth's magnetic field. Using ground-based observatories, the Program provides continuous records of magnetic field variations covering long timescales; disseminates magnetic data to various governmental, academic, and private institutions; and conducts research into the nature of geomagnetic variations for purposes,
 Geomagnetic perturbations (BGEO) related to magnetospheric ultralow frequency (ULF) waves induce electric fields within the conductive Earth—geoelectric fields (EGEO)—that in turn drive geomagnetically induced currents. Though numerous past studies have examined ULF wave BGEO from a space weather perspective, few studies have linked ULF waves with EGEO. Using recently available magnetotelluric impedance and EGEO measurements in the contiguous United States, we explore the relationship between ULF waves and EGEO. We use satellite, ground‐based radar, BGEO, and EGEO measurements in a case study of a plasmaspheric virtual resonance (PVR), demonstrating that the PVR EGEO has significant spatial variation in contrast to a relatively uniform BGEO, consistent with spatially varying Earth conductivity. We further show ULF wave EGEO measurements during two moderate storms of ∼1 V/km. We use both results to highlight the need for more research characterizing ULF wave EGEO.,
 Solar flares and magnetic storms belong to a set of phenomena known collectively as \space weather\. Technological systems and the activities of modern civilization can be affected by changing space-weather conditions. However, it has never been demonstrated that there is a causal relationship between space weather and earthquakes. Indeed, over the course of the Sun's 11-year variable cycle, the occurrence of flares and magnetic storms waxes and wanes, but earthquakes occur without any such 11-year variability. Since earthquakes are driven by processes in the Earth's interior, they would occur even if solar flares and magnetic storms were to somehow cease occurring.,
 Magnetic declination (sometimes called magnetic variation) is the angle between magnetic north and true north. Declination is positive when this angle is east of true north and negative when it is west. Magnetic declination changes over time, and with location. Declination value is needed to determine true north, because compasses point toward magnetic north.,
 You can compute the true bearing from a magnetic bearing by adding the magnetic declination to the magnetic bearing. This works as long as you follow the convention that degrees west are negative (i.e. a magnetic declination of 10-degrees west is -10 and bearing of 45-degrees west is -45). Some example case illustrations are provided for an east magnetic declination and a west magnetic declination.,
 EMAG2 (Earth Magnetic Anomaly Grid 2-arc-minute resolution) is compiled from satellite, ship, and airborne magnetic measurements. Magnetic anomalies result from geologic features enhancing or depressing the local magnetic field. These maps increase knowledge of subsurface structure and composition of the Earth's crust. Global magnetic anomaly grids are used for resource exploration, navigation where GPS is unavailable (submarine, directional drilling, etc.), and studying the evolution of the lithosphere.,
 The latest EMAG2 (v3) includes more than 11.5M new ship and airborne track-line data, and several new or updated precompiled grids. While the previous EMAG2 relied on known or idealized local geology to interpolate anomalies into non-existent data areas, EMAG2 v3 relies solely on the data available. As a result, EMAG2 v3 better represents the complexity of these anomalies (particularly in oceanic regions) and accurately reflects areas where no data have been collected. The current version reports anomalies in two ways: A consistent altitude of 4km (referred to as Upward Continued) Anomaly altitude at Sea Level above oceanic regions and 4km above continental regions (referred to as Sea Level).,
 This version (2009) is a significant update over our first global magnetic anomaly grid, EMAG3. It relies on ocean age models to directionally grid anomaly data into areas where no data exists. The grid is reported at an altitude of 4km.,
 The global magnetic map illustrates Earth's evolution (plate tectonics and crustal interaction with the deep mantle). Distinct patterns and magnetic signatures are attributed to the formation (seafloor spreading) and destruction (subduction zones) of oceanic crust, and the formation of continental crust by accretion of various terrains to cratonic areas and large scale volcanism (both on continents and oceans).,
 The International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) is a standard mathematical description of the Earth's main magnetic field. It is used widely in studies of the Earth's deep interior, crust, ionosphere, and magnetosphere. While this web page is hosted at NOAA/NCEI, the model itself is developed and maintained by the International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA).,
 The coefficients for the 13th generation of IGRF model were finalized by an IAGA task force in December 2019. The IGRF is the product of a collaborative effort between magnetic field modelers and the institutes involved in collecting and disseminating magnetic field data collected from satellites, observatories, and surveys around the world. Please review the Model Health Warning before using the IGRF.,
 The software code is in the public domain and not licensed or under copyright. The information and software may be used freely by the public. As required by 17 U.S.C. 403, third parties producing copyrighted works consisting predominantly of the material produced by U.S. government agencies must provide notice with such work(s) identifying the U.S. Government material incorporated and stating that such material is not subject to copyright protection.,
 Older versions of the IGRF may be required in special cases. For example, if a magnetic survey was conducted in 1983, the appropriate predictive IGRF-3 (available at that time) would have been subtracted to make an anomaly map. If the original data are no longer available to update the map, add the IGRF-3 to the anomaly map and then subtract IGRF-13 which includes the required definitive magnetic reference field (DGRF) model for 1980–1985.,
 The IGRF is a series of mathematical models of the Earth's main field and its annual rate of change (secular variation). In source-free regions at the Earth's surface and above, the main field, with sources internal to the Earth, is the negative gradient of a scalar potential V which can be represented by a truncated series expansion:,
 Here, a = 6371.2 km and the degree of truncation is N = 13. The 13th Generation IGRF coefficients were computed from candidate sets of coefficients produced by the participating members of IAGA Working Group V-MOD. Their institutes and the many organizations involved in operating magnetic survey satellites, observatories, magnetic survey programs and World Data Centers are to be thanked for their continuing support of the IGRF project.,
 Magnetic poles are commonly understood as positions on Earth's surface where the geomagnetic field is vertical (i.e., perpendicular) to the ellipsoid. These north and south positions, called dip poles, do not need to be (and are not currently) antipodal. In principle, the dip poles can be found by conducting a magnetic survey to determine where the field is vertical. In practice, the geomagnetic field is vertical on oval-shaped loci traced on a daily basis, with considerable variation from one day to the next. Other definitions of geomagnetic poles depend on the way the poles are computed from a geomagnetic model.,
 It has been long understood that dip poles migrate over time. In 1831, James Clark Ross located the north dip pole position in northern Canada. Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) tracked the North Magnetic Pole, which is slowly drifting across the Canadian Arctic, by periodically carrying out magnetic surveys to reestablish the Pole's location from 1948 to 1994. An international collaboration, led by a French fundraising association, Poly-Arctique, and involving NRCan, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris and Bureau de Recherche Geologique et Miniere, added two locations of the North Magnetic Pole in 2001 and 2007. The most recent survey determined that the Pole is moving approximately north-northwest at 55km per year.,
 Geomagnetic field models can also define geomagnetic poles. The geomagnetic poles, or geocentric dipole, can be computed from the first three Gauss coefficients from a main field model, such as the World Magnetic Model (WMM) or International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF). The WMM representation of the field includes a magnetic dipole at the center of Earth. This dipole defines an axis that intersects Earth's surface at two antipodal points called geomagnetic poles. Based on the WMM2020 coefficients for 2020.0, the Geomagnetic North Pole is at 72.68°W longitude and 80.37°N latitude, and the Geomagnetic South Pole is at 107.32°E longitude and 80.37°S latitude. The axis of the dipole is currently inclined at 9.41° to Earth's rotation axis. The same dipole is the basis for the simple geomagnetic coordinate system of geomagnetic latitude and longitude. ,
 Scientists, map makers, and polar explorers have an interest in the locations of the dip and geomagnetic poles. Although geomagnetic pole positions cannot be observed, they are arguably of greater significance than the dip poles because the auroral ovals (approximate 5° latitude bands where the spectacular aurora is likely visible) are closely centered on the geomagnetic poles. They are usually displaced slightly to the night-side of the geomagnetic poles and greatly vary in size: bands of greatest activity occur between 15° and 25° from the geomagnetic poles.,
 GM POLE is a program that can compute the locations of the geomagnetic poles from January 1900–December 2015 using a linear interpolation of the dipole Gauss coefficients from the geomagnetic reference field models (see file ALL-IGRF.TAB below). This program uses a computational method devised by Fraser-Smith (1987) and originally coded by W.H. Campbell. New version coded by Adam Woods. ,
 The magnetic poles or dip poles are computed from all the Gauss coefficients using an iterative method. Magnetic poles derived in this fashion are geographically closer to the experimentally observed poles. Based on the current WMM, the 2020 location of the North Magnetic Pole is 86.50°N and 164.04°E and the South Magnetic Pole is 64.07°S and 135.88°E.,
 NOAA’s CrowdMag is a crowdsourced data collection project that uses a mobile app to collect geomagnetic data from the magnetometers that modern smartphones use as part of their navigation systems. NCEI collects these data from citizen scientists around the world and provides quality control services before making them available through a series of aggregated maps and charts. These data have the potential to provide a high resolution alternative to geomagnetic satellite data, as well as near real-time information about changes in the magnetic field.,
 The CrowdMag Interactive Map shows crowdsourced magnetic data collected in the past 24 hours from the CrowdMag app. Data are updated hourly, and data points are snapped to the nearest grid points (following a roughly 1x1 kilometer grid) to ensure the privacy of data contributors.,
 Use the “+” sign in the upper right-hand on the map to display older data. The F channel represents Total Magnetic Field Strength, H channel represents the Magnetic Field’s Horizontal Component, and Z channel represents the Magnetic Field’s Vertical Component.,
 The NCEI Geomagnetism Group conducts original research on the Earth’s magnetic field. Our primary goal is to create up-to-date models that accurately track and depict changes to the geomagnetic field. Our magnetic models are integrated into millions of smartphones, car and aircraft navigation systems, and GPS so that users know which way is north.,
 The geomagnetic field changes with both time and location, and it needs to be monitored regularly to assess its impact on magnetic navigation. Scientists use ground-based observatories, data from satellites, and ship/airborne surveys to map the geomagnetic field and its changes, but these observation methods still leave significant coverage gaps. CrowdMag mobile apps are designed to help fill these gaps by using cell phone magnetometers to collect geomagnetic data.,
 Contributing data to CrowdMag is incredibly easy. Install the CrowdMag app, and use it to measure magnetic data along your path during walks, runs, or other outdoor activities. Data (\Magtivities\) can be used to create a map of the magnetic field in your area. We encourage you to share your data with the NCEI geomagnetism research group, and to take multiple measurements along the same path to improve data quality and resolution.CrowdMag’s magnetic calculator provides magnetic variation (declination), the magnetic field’s dip angle, the total magnetic field and other magnetic field components (as well as their associated uncertainties) based on the latest World Magnetic Model.,
 Getting a new phone? You can export your data to your computer before switching devices. Once your new phone is ready to go, you can import the backup data and continue using CrowdMag without losing your status for data contributed, areas covered, or magtivities completed.,
 The CrowdMag app now has a flight mode where you can collect magnetic data while you fly. Airplane observations fill in a large gap in magnetic data. Satellites can capture the biggest shapes of the magnetic field, and ground based observations can capture the smallest, but scientists aren’t able to capture observations between those extremes without aircraft. Help contribute to this project the next time you fly!,
 CrowdMag is a citizen science project that uses your mobile phone’s internal magnetometer to record magnetic data as you move. Anonymous data collected through the application can be used to detect magnetic anomalies caused by objects in the surrounding environment and also helps inform NOAA science.,
 In addition to the NOAA privacy policy, the CrowdMag app implements the following privacy measure to ensure that CrowdMag data are collected anonymously. We do not collect personally identifiable information, including your name, email address, or your device's unique identification number. If you enable the “send data” option in the CrowdMag app, the following information will be sent to NOAA:,
 CrowdMag data are stored in an internal, non-public database at NCEI. Our magnetic field research team will use these data to assess the utility of incorporating crowdsourced magnetic field data for modeling Earth’s magnetic field. Using CrowdMag data, our team will periodically produce scientific products such as maps, graphs and/or mathematical models. In order to further geomagnetic field research, these products may be presented at meetings, be included in publications, or be made available to the public via the Internet.,
 There are numerous indices of magnetic activity. The International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA) officially recognizes magnetic indices aa, Am, Kp, Dst, and AE. More information about the IAGA indices is available from the International Services for Geomagnetic Indices (ISGI).,
 A simple global index of magnetic activity is produced in France from the K indices of two nearly antipodal magnetic observatories in England and Australia. This index aa, is the 3-hourly equivalent amplitude antipodal index. Daily average AA may be derived similarly to Ap. An historical advantage to using aa rather than ap is that these indices have been extended back in time through scaling of magnetic activity from magnetograms of earlier observations. The aa indices are derived from 1868 to the present. An AA* index has been derived that is the counterpart of Ap* but is available for a longer span of years. However, the AA* is derived from indices from only two magnetic observatories whereas Ap* incorporates indices from more observatories.,
 Because of the difference in units of presentation, the values of AA* and Ap* are not the same so that different major magnetic storm onset and end threshold values are used for the two series. However their comparison for the years of overlapping coverage show that relative frequency of occurrence of major storms per year are similar. Another reason for differences is that an index derived from magnetic perturbation values at only two observatories easily experiences larger extreme values if either input site is well situated to the overhead ionospheric and.or field aligned current systems producing the magnetic storm effects. Although not documented here, it is interesting to note that the overall level of magnetic disturbance from year to year has increased substantially from a low around 1900 Also, the level of mean yearly aa is now much higher so that a year of minimum magnetic disturbances now is typically more disturbed than years at maximum disturbance levels before 1900.,
 The Auroral Electrojet Index, AE, is designed to provide a global, quantitative measure of auroral zone magnetic activity produced by enhanced Ionospheric currents flowing below and within the auroral oval. Ideally, It is the total range of deviation at an instant of time from quiet day values of the horizontal magnetic field (h) around the auroral oval. Defined and developed by Davis and Sugiura [1966], AE has been usefully employed both qualitatively and quantitatively as a correlative index in studies of substorm morphology, the behavior of communication satellites, radio propagation, radio scintillation, and the coupling between the interplanetary magnetic field and the earth's magnetosphere. For these varied uses, AE possesses advantages over other geomagnetic indices or at least shares their advantageous properties:,
 These indices were and are derived in response to indications of need as voiced by the scientific user community in journal articles, at meetings in resolutions of national and international groups, and in personal communications.,
 Ap* is defined as the earliest occurring maximum 24-hour value obtained by computing an 8-point running average of successive 3-hour ap indices during a geomagnetic storm event without regard to the starting and ending times of the UT-day. It is uniquely associated with the storm event. Over many years, values of Ap* provide a maximum disturbance measure useful to identify major geomagnetic storms chronologically (by date and start time) and by amplitude from largest to the smallest. The earliest possible values are for 1932, because that is the first year for which the standard Kp and ap indices were produced. As NGDC staff or others have time to update Ap*, tables of values are available from 1932 to recent times. ,
 DST (Disturbance Storm Time) equivalent equatorial magnetic disturbance indices are derived from hourly scaling's of low-latitude horizontal magnetic variation. They show the effect of the globally symmetrical westward flowing high altitude equatorial ring current, which causes the \main phase\ depression worldwide in the H-component field during large magnetic storms. This diskette contains the hourly indices for the period 1 Jan 1957 through 30 Sep 1992, as derived by M. Sugiura and T. Kamei, WDC-C2 for Geomagnetism, Faculty of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606, Japan.,
 Hourly H-component magnetic variations are analyzed to remove annual secular change trends from records of a worldwide array of low-latitude observatories. A cosine factor of the site latitude transforms residual variations to their equatorial equivalents and harmonic analysis isolates the term used as the DST index. Sugiura described DST derivation in ANNALS OF THE IGY.,
 Partial and symmetric magnetospheric ring currents, magnetopause, neutral sheet and tail currents generate a magnetic disturbance field which is monitored by the global network of magnetic observatories. The dominant axi-symmetric part of this disturbance field is estimated from the recordings at four low-latitude observatories and is distributed by the World Data Centers as the Dst index.,
 Further separating the disturbance magnetic field into external and induced contributions provides the Est index for the external source field and the Ist index for the internal induced field. (Ref: Maus, Stefan; Weidelt, Peter; Separating the magnetospheric disturbance magnetic field into external and transient internal contributions using a 1D conductivity model of the Earth; Geophys. Res. Lett., Vol. 31, No. 12, L12614),
 The physical motivation for this separation is that the time varying magnetospheric fields induce electric currents in the Earth which in turn give rise to a secondary internal field whose strength is roughly one third of the external field. Hence, the disturbance field observed at the Earth's surface is the sum of the external source field and its induced counterpart. If the Earth were an ideal conductor then the two fields would be exactly in phase because currents would be induced in such a way as to prevent any external field from entering into the conductor.,
 Furthermore, for an ideal conductor the strength of the induced field would be such that its radial component would cancel the radial component of the inducing field everywhere on its surface. For the real Earth, however, the phase lag and amplitude relation between the induced internal and inducing external field depends on the frequency content of the external source field.,
 Daily regular magnetic field variation arise from current systems caused by regular solar radiation changes. Other irregular current systems produce magnetic field changes caused by the interaction of the solar wind with the magnetosphere, by the magnetosphere itself, by the interactions between the magnetosphere and ionosphere, and by the ionosphere itself.,
 The K-index is quasi-logarithmic local index of the 3-hourly range in magnetic activity relative to an assumed quiet-day curve for a single geomagnetic observatory site. First introduced by J. Bartels in 1938, it consists of a single-digit 0 thru 9 for each 3-hour interval of the universal time day (UT).,
 The planetary 3-hour-range index Kp is the mean standardized K-index from 13 geomagnetic observatories between 44 degrees and 60 degrees northern or southern geomagnetic latitude. The scale is O to 9 expressed in thirds of a unit, e.g. 5- is 4 2/3, 5 is 5 and 5+ is 5 1/3. This planetary index is designed to measure solar particle radiation by its magnetic effects. The 3-hourly ap (equivalent range) index is derived from the Kp index as follows:,
 Other planetary indices include the Ap* and AA*. The Ap* index is defined as the earliest occurring maximum 24-hour value obtained by computing an 8-point running average of successive 3-hour ap indices during a geomagnetic storm event and is uniquely associated with the storm event. The AA* index is similar to the Ap* index, but has a longer history and is based on reports from only two stations.,
 The High Definition Geomagnetic Model (HDGM) is a global, high resolution model of Earth's geomagnetic main and crustal field. The model provides magnetic field values (total field, dip, and declination) at any point above or below Earth's surface. The HDGM is updated annually to correctly model secular changes in the geomagnetic field.,
 HDGM Real-Time (RT) was developed by NOAA in partnership with the directional drilling industry and the University of Colorado. The RT version improves the base model by accurately modeling the magnetic fields originating in Earth's magnetosphere. It runs on input data from a combination of solar-wind observing satellites situated between Earth and sun and a chain of geomagnetic observatories on Earth's surface. ,
 The model also includes an ionospheric field model calculated from a combination of observatory and Swarm satellite data in order to represent the daily variations in the ionosphere. The addition of HDGM-RT can save rig-time and reduce the drilling cost by enabling improved drill string interference correction during adverse space weather conditions.,
 *Real-time modeling depends on live data streaming from observatories and satellites. Due to potential data linkage and corruption issues, a delay of real-time value calculations up to 2 hours is possible. Disturbance field is magnetospheric magnetic field and diurnal variation (ionospheric field at mid and low latitudes).,
 The error model is a scaled version of the magnetic error values provided in the Industry Steering Committee on Wellbore Survey Accuracy (ISCWSA) Measurement While Drilling (MWD) model (Reference: SPE 67616). The multiplier was derived by comparing measured Total Magnetic Field Strength values with those predicted by the geomagnetic models. The Declination and Magnetic Dip angular values were checked to confirm the same multiplier was valid. The error values in the following table may be interpreted as one standard deviation difference between a hypothetical measurement and the calculator result for a location. More details of the scaling method is available in the paper SPE 151436.,
 For locations where magnetic survey data are not available, the HDGM software outputs the Standard ISCWSA model error, reflecting the lower resolution of the model at that location. See Figure 1 for HDGM’s magnetic data coverage (purple, see paper OTC-31044-MS).,
 *BH dependent error term. For example, the declination error of HDGM model in Boulder, CO (H = 20,800 nT) is calculated as √0.302 + (4118/20800)  2=36°. Standard model is defined as an annually updated geomagnetic model with a spherical harmonic degree and order of 50.,
 Nair, M. , A. Chulliat, A. Woods, P. Alken, B. Meyer, B. Poedjono, N. Zachman, and J. Hernandez, \Next Generation High-Definition Geomagnetic Model for Wellbore Positioning, Incorporating New Crustal Magnetic Data.\ Paper presented at the Offshore Technology Conference, Virtual and Houston, Texas, August 2021. Paper Number: OTC-31044-MS doi: https://doi.org/10.4043/31044-MS,
 SPE 151436; Maus, S., M. C. Nair, B. Poedjono, S. Okewunmi, J. D. Fairhead, U. Barckhausen, P. R. Milligan, J. Matzka (2012), High Definition Geomagnetic Models: A New Perspective for Improved Wellbore Positioning, IADC/SPE Drilling Conference and Exhibition, 6-8 March 2012, San Diego, California, USA, doi: 10.2118/151436-MS https://www.onepetro.org/conference-paper/SPE-151436-MS,
 Nair, M. , A. Chulliat, A. Woods, P. Alken, B. Meyer, B. Poedjono, N. Zachman, and J. Hernandez, Next Generation High-Definition Geomagnetic Model for Wellbore Positioning, Incorporating New Crustal Magnetic Data. Paper presented at the Offshore Technology Conference, Virtual and Houston, Texas, August 2021. Paper Number: OTC-31044-MS doi: https://doi.org/10.4043/31044-MS,
 Nair, M., P. Alken and A. Chulliat, Forecasting the magnetic disturbance-storm-time (Dst) index using machine-learning. Industry Steering Committee on Wellbore Survey Accuracy (ISCWSA) 48th meeting, September 27, 2018, Dallas, TX https://www.iscwsa.net/media/files/files/d38b39a3/iscwsa-spe-wpts-manoj-nair-2018-sept.pdf,
 SPE 151436; Maus, S., M. C. Nair, B. Poedjono, S. Okewunmi, J. D. Fairhead, U. Barckhausen, P. R. Milligan, J. Matzka (2012), High Definition Geomagnetic Models: A New Perspective for Improved Wellbore Positioning, IADC/SPE Drilling Conference and Exhibition, 6-8 March 2012, San Diego, California, USA, doi: 10.2118/151436-MS ,
 Chulliat, A., M. Nair, P. Alken, B. Meyer, R. Saltus, A. Woods and B. Poedjono, New Capabilities of NOAA’s High-Resolution Geomagnetic Reference Models. Industry Steering Committee on Wellbore Survey Accuracy (ISCWSA) 46th meeting, October 12, 2017, San Antonio, TX. https://www.iscwsa.net/media/files/files/14e1f5ae/8-iscwsa-spe-wpts-chulliat.pdf,
 Nair, M., A. Chulliat, A. Woods, P. Alken, B. Meyer and R. Saltus, New approach to quantify uncertainty for high-resolution magnetic reference models, Industry Steering Committee on Wellbore Survey Accuracy (ISCWSA) 45th meeting, March 17, 2017, The Hague, Netherlands. https://www.iscwsa.net/media/files/files/343888c9/12-jonbang-spe-184644-spe-wpts-icswsa-march-17.pdf,
 Alken, P., A. Chulliat, M. Nair, B. Meyer, R. Saltus, A. Woods, N. Boneh, New advances in geomagnetic field modeling, Industry Steering Committee on Wellbore Survey Accuracy (ISCWSA) 44th meeting, September 22nd, 2016, Glasgow, Scotland. https://www.iscwsa.net/media/files/files/d3b30bb0/08-isc44-patrickalken-noaa-geomagmodeling.pdf,
 Nair, M., A. Woods, A. Chulliat, P. Alken and N. Boneh, A real-time magnetic disturbance model to improve drilling accuracy in low and mid latitudes of the Earth, Industry Steering Committee on Wellbore Survey Accuracy (ISCWSA) 42nd meeting, October 1, 2015, Houston, Texas USA. https://www.iscwsa.net/media/files/files/73a6da7c/06-isc42-real-time-magnetic-disturbance.pdf,
 Maus, S., Nair, M., Woods, A., Gannon, J. L., Finn, C. A. & Love, J. J., The NGDC/USGS real-time magnetospheric disturbance field calculator, Industry Steering Committee on Wellbore Survey Accuracy (ISCWSA) October 11, 2012, San Antonio, Texas. https://www.iscwsa.net/media/files/files/7d638a33/meeting-36-ngdc-usgs-real-time-magnetospheric-disturbance-field-calculator.pdf,
 Maus, S., M. C. Nair, B. Poedjono, S. Okewunmi, J. D. Fairhead, U. Barckhausen, P. R. Milligan, J. Matzka, High Definition Geomagnetic Models: A New Perspective for Improved Wellbore Positioning, IADC/SPE Drilling Conference and Exhibition, 6-8 March 2012, San Diego, California, USA, isbn: 978-1-61399-186-2, doi: 10.2118/151436-MS, March, 2012. https://www.onepetro.org/conference-paper/SPE-151436-MS,
 While the National Environmental Satellite Data and Information Service (NESDIS) makes every effort to ensure that its databases are error-free, errors do occur. We ask that you notify us immediately of any errors that you discover in our data. We will make every effort to correct them.,
 With respect to documents available from this server, neither the United States Government nor any of its employees, contractors, or affiliates make any warranty, express or implied, including the warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose; nor assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed; nor represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights.,
 Reference to any specific commercial products, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government. The views and opinions of authors expressed on NESDIS websites do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government, and shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes.,
 The World Magnetic Model (WMM) is the standard model for navigation, altitude, and heading referencing systems using the geomagnetic field. Additional WMM uses include civilian applications, including navigation and heading systems.,
 The model is a joint product of the United States’ National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) and the United Kingdom’s Defence Geographic Centre (DGC). NCEI and the British Geological Survey (BGS) jointly developed the WMM. The U.S. Department of Defense, the U.K. Ministry of Defence, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) use the WMM.,
 The model, associated software, and documentation are distributed by NCEI on behalf of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA). The model is produced at 5-year intervals, with the current model expiring on December 31, 2024.,
 Download links first take you to a voluntary survey page. We request that you complete the survey to receive up to date information about WMM via email. Your feedback will strengthen the WMM program.,
 NCEI provides access to the DoD software and current WMM and WMM online calculator. The software computes the main components of the geomagnetic field and their annual changes. The programs are designed to be used in demand mode. The software is available as C source code. The model file, WMM.COF (format specification), is available in the same directory as the software.  Note:The altitude is referenced to the World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 84) ellipsoid. The WMM software library provides functions to convert height above mean sea level (AMSL) to height above WGS 84. This option is enabled by default.,
 Annual change, also known as Secular Variation (SV) in each of these magnetic components, is also displayed. The annual change is computed by subtracting the main field values for the desired input date from main field values one year later. The output units are displayed using the abbreviations nT (nanoTesla), deg (degrees) and min (minutes) per year. The new WMM2020 software also outputs uncertainty for each component. The error is one standard deviation difference between a hypothetical measurement and model output. The uncertainty values have the same units as their corresponding components.,
 Chulliat, A., W. Brown, P. Alken, C. Beggan, M. Nair, G. Cox, A. Woods, S. Macmillan, B. Meyer and M. Paniccia, The US/UK World Magnetic Model for 2020­-2025: Technical Report, National Centers for Environmental Information, NOAA, doi:10.25923/ytk1-yx35, 2020.,
 Note: The WMM source code is in the public domain and not licensed or under copyright. The information and software may be used freely by the public. As required by 17 U.S.C. 403, third parties producing copyrighted works consisting predominantly of the material produced by U.S. government agencies must provide notice with such work(s) identifying the U.S. Government material incorporated and stating that such material is not subject to copyright protection.,
 Several users have ported the WMM C or Fortran programs to other languages and have kindly offered to share these programs. Only non-commercial \free-ware\ will be linked from this site. Linking to third-party software does not imply an endorsement or review of any kind from the Federal Government. Users are encouraged to verify results based on the WMM test values.,
 Note: Because WMM is a \predictive only\ model, we do not make the older models (WMM.COF files) widely available. We recommend using the International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) models for years prior to 2015. IGRF is updated retrospectively to provide the best available estimate of the geomagnetic field back to 1900.,
 The modular C WMM software reads the coefficient file, WMM.COF, and computes the geomagnetic field at the user-specified location. The download file is always the latest version. This software for the WMM is developed as a C sub-library that can be incorporated into other applications and software. We use a modular programming approach to facilitate reuse in other applications. We also provide wrapper programs to produce single point, time series, and grid values of the magnetic field. The core numerical functions are optimized for speed and efficiency.,
 The geoid implementation of the WMM software references the altitude of the World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 84) ellipsoid. This is generally called height above ellipsoid (HAE). However, WMM users may be more familiar with the height above mean sea level (AMSL). The difference between AMSL and HAE varies with location and the total variation is less than 200 meters. The software allows users to enter their altitude above the mean sea level rather than their height above ellipsoid. Conversion between heights referenced to MSL and WGS84 ellipsoid was implemented using the EGM96 geoid.,
 The correction results in a difference of magnetic field strength of about 1-3 nT. The largest differences in magnetic field strength coincide with the largest deviations of the geoid from the WGS-84 ellipsoid. However, the effect of geoid height correction is negligible in the magnetic declination. The EGM-96 geoid height file will also be supplied with the WMM package for this purpose. This option is enabled by default.,
 The software accurately computes the associated Legendre functions up to degree 2,800, making it adaptable for high-degree geomagnetic models. Details of the WMMWorld Magnetic Model derivation are described in The US/UK World Magnetic Model for 2020-2025: Technical Report.,
 This calculator provides annual change, also known as secular variation (SV), for each of these magnetic components. Annual change is computed by subtracting the main field values for the desired input date from main field values one year later. The output units are displayed using the abbreviations nT (nanoTesla), deg (degrees) and min (minutes) per year.,
 WMM2020 software also provides uncertainty and estimated error for each component. The error is one standard deviation difference between a hypothetical measurement and model output. The uncertainty values have the same units as their corresponding components.,
 This web calculator will produce output for a grid of points for a range of dates. It outputs as either XML or CSV. Select the WMM2020 radio button to get results from the World Magnetic Model.,
 This web calculator will give declination for a single point. If HTML output is selected it includes a Google map with sample compass. Select the WMM2020 radio button to get results from the World Magnetic Model.,
 Contour maps were created for each of the seven magnetic elements (D, I, H, X, Y, Z, and F) and for their secular variation (rate of change). These maps are available for download in pdf format by clicking on the browse images below or you can download a zip file containing all of the map pdfs with or without the blackout zones. Maps are available in Adobe PDF and Esri Shapefile format.,
 The WMM consists of a degree and order 12 spherical-harmonic main (i.e., core-generated) field model of 168 spherical-harmonic Gauss coefficients and degree and order 12 spherical-harmonic Secular Variation (SV) (core-generated, slow temporal variation) field model. WMM2020 supersedes WMM2015 and WMM2015v2 and should replace these models in navigation systems. Also included with the model is computer software (available in C) for computing the magnetic field components X, Y, Z, F, D, I, and H in geodetic coordinates and their temporal variations. The spherical-harmonic expansions used to compute the magnetic field components are the same as the ones described in The US/UK World Magnetic Model for 2015–2020: Technical Report.,
 Earth's magnetic field, as measured by a magnetic sensor on or above Earth's surface, is actually the sum of magnetic fields generated by a variety of sources. These fields are superimposed on each other and through inductive processes interact with each other. The most important are these geomagnetic fields:,
 The observed magnetic field is a sum of contributions of the main field (varying in both time and space), the crustal field (varies spatially, but considered constant in time for the time-scales of the WMM), and the disturbance fields (varying in space and rapidly in time). Earth's main magnetic field dominates, accounting for over 95% of the field strength at Earth’s surface. Secular variation is the slow change in time of the main magnetic field. The WMM represents only the main geomagnetic field.,
 To create an accurate magnetic field model, it is necessary to have vector component measurements with good global coverage and low noise levels. The European Space Agency's SWARM satellite mission is presently the most suitable magnetic observing system. Also available are ground observatory hourly mean data, although with poorer spatial coverage. The observatory data can provide valuable constraints on the time variations of the geomagnetic field.,
 Compasses have been used for several thousand years to determine direction. They point in the direction of magnetic force at the user's location, and the direction it points is, more often than not, in a different direction than geographic north (toward the North Pole). A more precise direction is achieved by knowing the angle between them (magnetic declination). However, declination changes with location and time, and a geomagnetic model is often used to correct for it. Since the changes in geomagnetic fields are difficult to predict, timely model updates (every five years for the WMM) are required for navigational accuracy. The WMM satisfies all these criteria and is therefore widely used in navigation. Examples include, but are not limited to, ships, aircraft, and submarines. Aircraft and satellites commonly use magnetometer based attitude (roll and pitch) control.,
 Why do we need magnetic navigation when the Global Position System (GPS) is readily available? GPS provides precise point location but only measures travel direction when in constant motion. A GPS receiver must collect several sets of latitude and longitude pairs to obtain direction. In addition, GPS signals may become blocked due to obstructions, adverse terrestrial and space weather, ionospheric conditions, or being underwater or underground. Hence, compasses complement GPS receivers to attain precise and immediate navigational headings for air, ground, and water-based systems. Electronic compasses and the WMM commonly co-exist in GPS receivers.,
 Antennas (e.g. satellite dish television) and solar panels often need to be precisely oriented for maximum performance. The WMM's declination information for specific locations is often employed by companies to orient their products correctly.,
 While the WMM is traditionally used for navigation, it is now acquiring new utilities in consumer electronic devices with built-in digital compasses. Many of the new generations of smartphones and digital cameras take advantage of the WMM to estimate bearing. The availability of low-cost, small, and energy efficient electronic compasses allow for magnetic direction in portable electronics to be commonplace. NOAA is providing support to application development engineers to port WMM to their devices. For example, WMM comes pre-installed in Android and iOS devices, thereby bringing its use to more than a billion devices around the world. NOAA/NCEI has developed an application called CrowdMag that allows users to collect their own magnetic field data using the magnetometers in their phone. This app sends data anonymously back to NOAA so it can be used to help validate and expand future magnetic models.,
 Oil and mineral exploration companies use airborne and marine magnetic fields to detect magnetic signals from Earth's crust. These small amplitude signals (typically 100s of nT), must be separated from the large main magnetic field (typically 20,000 to 60,000 nT). Companies use geomagnetic models to extract these small magnetic signals from the survey records. A new application uses geomagnetic models for directional drilling. Oil wells are often drilled horizontally from a conveniently located platform. An electronic compass located behind the drill head (bit) provides the engineers with accurate orientation of the bit.,
 The December 2021 State of the Geomagnetic Field report is now available. This report provides an assessment of the performance of the WMM2020 two years after its release, and describes noteworthy changes in the Earth's main magnetic field, including magnetic pole drifts and the deepening of the South Atlantic Anomaly.,
 Changes of the fluid flow in Earth's outer core lead to unpredictable changes in Earth's magnetic field. Fortunately, the system has large inertia, so that these changes take place over time scales of many years. By surveying the field for a few years, one can precisely map the present field and its rate of change and then linearly extrapolate it out into the future. Provided that suitable satellite magnetic observations are available, the prediction of the WMM is highly accurate on its release date and then subsequently deteriorates towards the end of the five-year epoch, when it has to be updated with revised values of the model coefficients.,
 It is important to recognize that the WMM and the charts produced from this model characterize only the long-wavelength portion of Earth's internal magnetic field, which is primarily generated in Earth's fluid outer core. The portions of the geomagnetic field generated by Earth's crust and upper mantle, and by the ionosphere and magnetosphere, are largely unrepresented in the WMM. Consequently, a magnetic sensor such as a compass or magnetometer may observe spatial and temporal magnetic anomalies when referenced to the WMM. In particular, certain local, regional, and temporal magnetic declination anomalies can exceed 10 degrees. Anomalies of this magnitude are not common but they do exist. Declination anomalies of the order of 3 or 4 degrees are not uncommon but are usually of small spatial extent. See the Enhanced Magnetic Model (EMM) for a model which includes crustal fields down to 50km wavelength.,
 Based on the WMM military specification, we define “Blackout Zones” (BoZ) around the north and south magnetic poles where compass accuracy is highly degraded. The BoZ are defined as regions around the north and south magnetic poles where the horizontal intensity of Earth’s magnetic field (H) is less than 2000 nT. In BoZs, WMM declination values are inaccurate and compasses are unreliable.,
 We additionally define a “Caution Zone” (2000 nT <= H < 6000 nT) around the BoZ, where caution must be exercised while using a compass. Compass accuracy may be degraded in this region. The blackout (unreliable) and caution zones are displayed in figures 2 and 3. The WMM online/offline software displays warnings when the user location is within these zones.,
 The WMM2020 software and online calculator include an error model providing uncertainty estimates for every geomagnetic element (X, Y, Z, H, F, I and D) and every location at Earth's surface. This model is built upon the results of the error analysis (see the WMM2020 technical report, to be published in February 2020), while taking into account the geometrical relationships between the various components. It includes both the commission error (due to inaccuracies in model coefficients) and the omission error (due to missing contributions to the total geomagnetic field such as crustal and external fields). The error values (Table 1) may be interpreted as one standard deviation difference between a hypothetical measurement and the calculator result for a location.,
 A global map of the magnetic declination error is provided in Fig. 3. As can be seen on this map, the error is lower at mid- to low-latitudes, while it is larger near the magnetic poles and in an area close to South Africa where the horizontal field is very low. ,
 Based on the WMM2020 coefficients for 2020.0 the geomagnetic north pole is at 72.68°W longitude and 80.65°N latitude, and the geomagnetic south pole is at 107.32°E longitude and 80.65°S latitude. The axis of the dipole is currently inclined at 9.41° to Earth's rotation axis. The WMM can also be used to calculate dipole positions. These model dip poles are computed from all the Gauss coefficients using an iterative method. In 2020.0 the north dip pole computed from WMM2020 is located at longitude 164.04°E and latitude 86.50°N and the south dipole at longitude 135.88°E and latitude 64.07°S.,
 Every year, the performance of the WMM is assessed by comparing it to a more recent main geomagnetic field model, and by comparing its secular variation with the actual secular variation observed at ground-based observatories and satellite-based geomagnetic virtual observatories (GVOs). The evolution of the WMM Blackout Zones and the validity of the WMM error model are also reviewed as part of this assessment. For more information, see the latest State of the Geomagnetic Field report.,
 The World Magnetic Model coefficient file is named “WMM.COF”. Numerical values of the Gauss coefficients (g_nm, h_nm, g_dot_nm, h_dot_nm) at the base epoch; their corresponding predictive annual changes for the next five years; and their associated degrees and orders are provided in this file. For more details about the WMM Gauss coefficients, see section 1.2 of the WMM Technical report.,
 WMM coefficients are written to this file in a specific format. If implemented correctly, then the WMM.COF file format is designed to update to a new WMM by replacing the old “WMM.COF” file with the new “WMM.COF” file, without needing to make any changes to the software. The “WMM.COF” file is an ASCII file with one header line, 90 lines of coefficients data and two terminating lines. Each line has 48 characters, ending with a carriage return and a linefeed (\\\r).,
 WMM is valid for five years from the \Model Epoch\ parameter given in decimal years. The \Date of release\ of the model has no significance in magnetic field calculation and is U.S. style, MM/DD/YYYY.